What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? Acute lymphocytic leukemia is a type of acute leukemia. It's also called ALL and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. "Acute" means that it usually gets worse quickly if it's not treated. ALL is the most common type of cancer in children . It can also affect adults. In ALL, the bone marrow makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. These cells normally help your body fight infection. But in ALL, they are abnormal and cannot fight infection very well. They also crowd out the healthy cells, which can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding. These abnormal cells can also spread to other parts of the body, including the brain and spinal cord. What causes acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? ALL happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise your risk of ALL. Who is at risk for acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? The factors that raise your risk of ALL include: Being male Being white Being over age 70 Having had chemotherapy or radiation therapy Having been exposed to high levels of radiation Having certain genetic disorders , such as Down syndrome What are the symptoms of acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? The signs and symptoms of ALL include: Weakness or feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Shortness of breath Weight loss or loss of appetite Pain in the bones or stomach Pain or feeling of fullness below the ribs Swollen lymph nodes - you may notice them as painless lumps in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin Having had many infections How is acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose ALL and figure out which subtype you have: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as Complete blood count (CBC) with differential Blood chemistry tests such as a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and electrolyte panel Blood smear Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with ALL, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture , which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? Treatments for ALL include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Treatment is usually done in two phases: The goal of the first phase is to kill the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow. This treatment puts the leukemia into remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The second phase is known as post-remission therapy. Its goal is to prevent a relapse (return) of the cancer. It involves killing any remaining leukemia cells that may not be active but could begin to regrow. Treatment during both phases also usually includes central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis therapy. This therapy helps prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. It may be high dose chemotherapy or chemotherapy injected into the spinal cord. It also sometimes includes radiation therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of acute leukemia. "Acute" means that the leukemia usually gets worse quickly if it's not treated. In AML, the bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. When the abnormal cells crowd out the healthy cells, it can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding. The abnormal cells can also spread outside the blood to other parts of the body. There are several different subtypes of AML. The subtypes are based on how developed the cancer cells are when you get your diagnosis and how different they are from normal cells. What causes acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? AML happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise your risk of AML. Who is at risk for acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? The factors that raise your risk of AML include: Being male Smoking, especially after age 60 Having had chemotherapy or radiation therapy Treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) as a child Exposure to the chemical benzene A history of another blood disorder such as myelodysplastic syndrome What are the symptoms of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? The signs and symptoms of AML include: Fever Shortness of breath Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Weakness or feeling tired Weight loss or loss of appetite Bone or joint pain, if the abnormal cells build up near or inside the bones How is acute myeloid leukemia (AML) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose AML and figure out which subtype you have: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with AML, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture , which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? Treatments for AML include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Other anticancer medicines Which treatment you get often depends on which subtype of AML you have.
Treatment is usually done in two phases: The goal of the first phase is to kill the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow. This puts the leukemia into remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The second phase is known as post-remission therapy. Its goal is to prevent a relapse (return) of the cancer. It involves killing any remaining leukemia cells that may not be active but could begin to regrow. NIH: National Cancer Institute

If you have anemia, your blood does not carry enough oxygen to the rest of your body.  The most common cause of anemia is not having enough iron . Your body needs iron to make hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is an iron-rich protein that gives the red color to blood. It carries oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. Anemia has three main causes: blood loss, lack of red blood cell production, and high rates of red blood cell destruction. Conditions that may lead to anemia include: Heavy periods Pregnancy Ulcers Colon polyps or colon cancer Inherited disorders A diet that does not have enough iron, folic acid or vitamin B12 Blood disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia , or cancer Aplastic anemia , a condition that can be inherited or acquired G6PD deficiency , a metabolic disorder Anemia can make you feel tired, cold, dizzy, and irritable. You may be short of breath or have a headache. Your doctor will diagnose anemia with a physical exam and blood tests. Treatment depends on the kind of anemia you have. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

An aneurysm is a bulge or "ballooning" in the wall of an artery. Arteries are blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood from the heart to other parts of the body. If an aneurysm grows large, it can burst and cause dangerous bleeding or even death. Most aneurysms occur in the aorta , the main artery that runs from the heart through the chest and abdomen. Aneurysms also can happen in arteries in the brain, heart and other parts of the body. If an aneurysm in the brain bursts, it causes a stroke . Aneurysms can develop and become large before causing any symptoms.  Often doctors can stop aneurysms from bursting if they find and treat them early. They use imaging tests to find aneurysms.  Often aneurysms are found by chance during tests done for other reasons.   Medicines and surgery are the two main treatments for aneurysms. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Angina is chest pain or discomfort you feel when there is not enough blood flow to your heart muscle. Your heart muscle needs the oxygen that the blood carries. Angina may feel like pressure or a squeezing pain in your chest. It may feel like indigestion. You may also feel pain in your shoulders, arms, neck, jaw, or back. Angina is a symptom of coronary artery disease (CAD), the most common heart disease . CAD happens when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply blood to the heart, reducing blood flow. There are three types of angina: Stable angina is the most common type. It happens when the heart is working harder than usual. Stable angina has a regular pattern.  Rest and medicines usually help. Unstable angina is the most dangerous. It does not follow a pattern and can happen without physical exertion. It does not go away with rest or medicine. It is a sign that you could have a heart attack soon. Variant angina is rare. It happens when you are resting. Medicines can help. Not all chest pain or discomfort is angina.  If you have chest pain, you should see your health care provider. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is angioplasty? Angioplasty is a procedure to improve blood flow in coronary arteries that have become narrow or blocked. Your coronary arteries supply oxygen-rich blood to the heart. If you have coronary artery disease , a sticky material called plaque builds up in the coronary arteries. Plaque is made of cholesterol , calcium, and other substances in your blood. Over time, it can narrow your arteries or fully block them. When this happens, some parts of your heart don't get enough blood. Angioplasty widens the blocked part of the artery so more blood can get through. It is also called percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). What conditions does angioplasty treat? Doctors use angioplasty to: Reduce chest pain from blockages in the coronary arteries. This type of pain is called angina . There are different types of angina. Angioplasty treats certain types. Limit damage to the heart during or right after a heart attack . In this case, angioplasty is an emergency treatment. Angioplasty does not cure coronary artery disease. To help prevent more plaque blockages , you'll need to take any prescribed medicines, eat healthy foods, and get regular exercise . What happens during angioplasty? Most people have angioplasties in a hospital in a special room called a cardiac catheterization, or cath, lab. You will be awake and lying down. You'll get medicine to help you relax through an intravenous (IV) line. This is a small tube that goes into a vein in your hand or arm. Angioplasty is done through a blood vessel in your arm, wrist, or groin. Your doctor will: Make a small opening in that area to insert a thin tube (a catheter) into a blood vessel. Thread the tube through the vessel to your heart, using x-rays as a guide. Inject contrast dye inside your arteries. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the x-rays. Replace the first tube with another one that has a small, deflated balloon on the end. Guide the balloon inside the blockage and inflate it to push the plaque flat against the artery wall. This makes the artery wider and improves blood flow. Sometimes put a small, mesh tube into the artery to help keep it open. The tube is called a stent. Some stents have a coating of medicine that helps prevent blood clots from forming. What happens after an angioplasty? If you had an angioplasty for chest pain, you'll go to a recovery room for a few hours. You may stay in the hospital overnight. Your doctor will probably prescribe medicines to prevent blood clots . Most people can return to their usual activities after a week. If you had an emergency angioplasty for a heart attack, you'll need to stay in the hospital for about a few more days. Are there any risks from angioplasty? Angioplasty is very safe. You may get a bruise , feel sore, or have some bleeding where the tubes were inserted. More serious problems don't happen very often, but they are possible. They can include serious bleeding , blood clots, and narrowing of the artery again. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

An aneurysm is a bulge or "ballooning" in the wall of an artery. Arteries are blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood from the heart to other parts of the body. If an aneurysm grows large, it can burst and cause dangerous bleeding or even death. Most aneurysms are in the aorta, the main artery that runs from the heart through the chest and abdomen. There are two types of aortic aneurysm: Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA) - these occur in the part of the aorta running through the chest Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) - these occur in the part of the aorta running through the abdomen Most aneurysms are found during tests done for other reasons. Some people are at high risk for aneurysms. It is important for them to get screening, because aneurysms can develop and become large before causing any symptoms. Screening is recommended for people between the ages of 65 and 75 if they have a family history, or if they are men who have smoked. Doctors use imaging tests to find aneurysms. Medicines and surgery are the two main treatments. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is aplastic anemia? Aplastic anemia is a rare but serious blood disorder.  If you have it, your bone marrow doesn't make enough new blood cells. It happens when there is damage to stem cells inside your bone marrow. There are different types of aplastic anemia, including Fanconi anemia. What causes aplastic anemia? The causes of aplastic anemia can include: Autoimmune disorders , which are the most common cause Certain inherited gene changes, such as the one that can cause Fanconi anemia Toxic substances, such as pesticides , arsenic , and benzene Radiation therapy and chemotherapy for cancer Certain medicines Viral infections such as hepatitis , Epstein-Barr virus, or HIV Pregnancy In many people, the cause is unknown. This is called idiopathic aplastic anemia. What are the symptoms of aplastic anemia? Aplastic anemia can develop suddenly or slowly. It can be mild or severe. The symptoms of aplastic anemia can include: Fatigue Weakness Dizziness Shortness of breath Easy bruising or bleeding What other problems can aplastic anemia cause? Aplastic anemia can cause other problems, including frequent infections and bleeding. It raises your risk of developing a serious blood disorder . If not treated, aplastic anemia can also lead to heart problems such as an arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat), an enlarged heart, or heart failure . How is aplastic anemia diagnosed? To find out if you have aplastic anemia, your doctor will: Take your medical and your family medical histories Do a physical exam Order tests, such as tests to check if you have low numbers of cells in your bone marrow and blood What are the treatments for aplastic anemia? If you have aplastic anemia, your doctor will create a treatment plan for you. The plan will be based on how severe the anemia is and what is causing it. Treatments can include: Blood transfusions Blood and marrow stem cell transplants Medicines to suppress your immune system Because of the risk of blood disorders, your doctor will monitor your condition and screen you for blood disorders regularly. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

An arrhythmia is a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. When the heart beats faster than normal, it is called tachycardia. When the heart beats too slowly, it is called bradycardia. The most common type of arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation , which causes an irregular and fast heart beat. Many factors can affect your heart's rhythm, such as having had a heart attack , smoking, congenital heart defects , and stress. Some substances or medicines may also cause arrhythmias. Symptoms of arrhythmias include: Fast or slow heart beat Skipping beats Lightheadedness or dizziness Chest pain Shortness of breath Sweating Your doctor can run tests to find out if you have an arrhythmia. Treatment to restore a normal heart rhythm may include medicines, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or pacemaker , or sometimes surgery. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What are arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are defects in your vascular system .  Your vascular system is your body's network of blood vessels. It includes your: Arteries, which carry oxygen-rich blood from your heart to your tissues and organs. Veins, which carry the blood and waste products back to your heart. Capillaries, which are tiny blood vessels that connect your small arteries to your small veins. An AVM is an abnormal tangle of arteries and veins. They are connected to each other, with no capillaries between them. Without the capillaries, the blood flow from the arteries goes directly into the veins at a faster rate than normal. Because of this, the nearby tissue does not get all the oxygen it would normally get. This lack of oxygen can lead to tissue damage and the death of nerve cells and other cells. The fast rate of blood flow can also increase the blood pressure inside the arteries and veins. This can weaken the arteries and veins. A weakened artery or blood vessel could burst or leak blood. What causes arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? AVMs are rare. The cause of AVMs is unknown. Most of the time, people are born with them. But sometimes they can appear shortly after birth or later in life. What are the symptoms of arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? The symptoms of AVM will depend on where the AVM is located. They can happen anywhere in the body, but they are more common in the brain or spinal cord. Most people with brain or spinal cord AVMs have few, if any, major symptoms. But if a weakened blood vessel bursts, it can spill blood into the brain (called a hemorrhage). Severe hemorrhages can cause a stroke and brain damage. If an AVM is causing symptoms, they can include: Seizures Headache Pain in the area where the AVM is located Vision problems Muscle weakness Problems with movement and speech Confusion Dizziness Loss of consciousness How are arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) diagnosed? To find out if you have an AVM, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history. Will do a physical exam. This may include listening for a bruit. A bruit is whooshing sound caused by the rapid blood flow through the arteries and veins of an AVM. May order imaging tests , such as a CT scan , MRI , ultrasound , or cerebral angiography. For a cerebral angiography, you are injected with a special dye that helps the blood vessels in your brain show up on x-rays . What are the treatments for arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? Treatments for AVMs will depend on factors such as: Where the AVM is located Its size Your symptoms Your overall health Your risk of bleeding The treatment options may include: Monitoring for any signs that may mean you have an increased risk of hemorrhage. Medicines to help with the symptoms from AVMs. Surgery, which may be done if you have a higher-than-usual risk of bleeding. There are a few different types of surgery for AVMs. In some cases, you may have more than one type. Surgery can be risky, especially when it's done on the brain or spinal cord. So you and your provider will need to discuss the risks and benefits of doing the surgery before you make a decision. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is atherosclerosis? Atherosclerosis is a condition in which plaque builds up inside your arteries. Plaque is a sticky substance made up of cholesterol , fat, blood cells, calcium, and other substances found in the blood. Over time, plaque hardens and causes your arteries to narrow. That limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your body. Some people may confuse atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis, but they are not the same thing: Arteriosclerosis is hardening of the arteries, which means that the arteries thicken and become less flexible. It can have several different causes. Atherosclerosis , which develops from plaque buildup, is a common type of arteriosclerosis. Atherosclerosis can affect most of the arteries in the body. It has different names, based on which arteries are affected: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is plaque buildup in the arteries of your heart. Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is plaque buildup in the arteries that carry blood away from the heart to other parts of the body. It most often affects the arteries of your legs, but it can also affect the arteries of your arms or pelvis. Carotid artery disease is plaque buildup in the neck arteries. It reduces blood flow to the brain. Renal artery stenosis is plaque buildup in the arteries that supply blood to your kidneys. Vertebral artery disease is plaque buildup in the arteries that supply blood to the back of your brain. Mesenteric artery ischemia is plaque buildup in the arteries that supply your intestines with blood. What causes atherosclerosis? Plaque often starts to build up during childhood and gets worse with age. The exact cause is unknown, but researchers believe that this buildup happens when there is damage to the arteries. This damage may be caused by unhealthy lifestyle habits, medical conditions, and your genes. Who is more likely to develop atherosclerosis? You may be more likely to develop atherosclerosis if you: Have certain medical conditions, including: High blood pressure High blood cholesterol Diabetes Metabolic syndrome Inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis Have a family history of high blood cholesterol Eat a lot of foods high in saturated fats Smoke or chew tobacco Are older - the risk increases after age 45 men and age 55 in women What are the symptoms of atherosclerosis? In the early stages, atherosclerosis often does not cause any symptoms. You may first notice some symptoms at times when your body needs more oxygen. For example, this could be when you are having physical or emotional stress. Your symptoms will depend on which arteries are affected and how much blood flow is blocked: With coronary artery disease , the symptoms may include angina (a type of chest pain), palpitations (racing or pounding heart), and shortness of breath . With carotid artery disease , you may have a bruit. This is a whooshing sound that your health care provider hears when using a stethoscope. You could also have a transient ischemic attack (TIA), sometimes called a mini-stroke. With peripheral artery disease , you may have pain, aching, heaviness, or cramping in the legs when walking or climbing stairs. With vertebral artery disease , you may have problems with thinking and memory, weakness or numbness on one side of the body or face, and vision trouble. You could also have a transient ischemic attack. With mesenteric artery ischemia , the symptoms can include severe pain after meals, weight loss, and diarrhea . For men, erectile dysfunction (ED) is an early warning sign that you may be at higher risk for atherosclerosis and its complications. If you have ED, talk with your provider about your risk of plaque buildup. What other problems can atherosclerosis cause? Atherosclerosis can cause other health problems, or complications. For example, if a plaque bursts, a blood clot may form. The clot could block the artery completely or travel to another part of the body. Other possible complications can vary, depending on which arteries are affected. For example, blockages in different parts of the body can lead to complications such as a heart attack , stroke , vascular dementia , or limb loss . How is atherosclerosis diagnosed? To find out if you have atherosclerosis, your provider: Will ask about your medical and family health history Will ask about your lifestyle and risk factors for plaque buildup in the arteries Will do a physical exam, which will include listening to your heart and the blood flow in your arteries Will likely order tests, such as blood tests and heart health tests What are the treatments for atherosclerosis? If you have atherosclerosis, your provider will work with you to create a treatment plan that works for you. Your plan will depend on which arteries are affected, how much the blood flow is blocked, and what other medical conditions you have. Possible treatments may include: Heart-healthy lifestyle changes . Medicines to: Manage your risk factors. Treat atherosclerosis or its complications. Treat any medical conditions you have that can worsen plaque buildup. Procedures or surgeries to treat diseases or complications that were caused by plaque buildup. The specific type of procedure or surgery will depend on which arteries are affected. Cardiac rehabilitation , if you have had certain complications from atherosclerosis. Can atherosclerosis be prevented? There are steps you can take to try to prevent atherosclerosis: Choose heart-healthy foods , such fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. Limit foods that are high in saturated fats, salt , and added sugars. Do regular physical activity . But before you start an exercise program, ask your provider what level of physical activity is right for you. Aim for a healthy weight . Limit how much alcohol you drink. Drinking less is better for health than drinking more. Men should limit their intake to 2 drinks or less in a day. Women should drink 1 drink or less per day. Manage stress . If you smoke, quit smoking . Avoid secondhand smoke . Get enough good-quality sleep . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is atrial fibrillation (AFib)? Atrial fibrillation, also known as AFib or AF, is one of the most common types of arrhythmias .  Arrhythmias are problems with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. They can cause your heart to beat too slowly, too fast, or in an irregular way. If you have AFib, your heart beats irregularly and sometimes much faster than normal. Also, your heart's upper and lower chambers do not work together as they should. When this happens, the lower chambers do not fill completely or pump enough blood to your lungs and body. This can cause symptoms such as dizziness , fatigue , and a pounding heartbeat. AFib may happen in brief episodes, or it may be a permanent condition. It's very important to treat it, since AFib can put you at risk for stroke and other heart conditions . What causes atrial fibrillation (AFib)? AFib is most often caused by changes to the heart's tissue or the electrical signaling that helps the heartbeat. These changes can happen due to different conditions and factors, such as high blood pressure , coronary artery disease , congenital heart defects , infections, and aging. Sometimes the cause is unknown. Who is more likely to develop atrial fibrillation (AFib)? Anyone can develop AFib, but there are certain things that raise your risk for it: Aging. The risk of atrial fibrillation increases as you get older, especially when you are over age 65. Family history and genetics. AFib can run in families. So can heart disease, which raises your risk of AFib. Some lifestyle choices. Your risk is higher if you drink a lot of alcohol, use certain illegal drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamines, or smoke. Having certain health conditions, such as: High blood pressure Diabetes Heart failure Heart valve diseases Obesity Hyperthyroidism Chronic kidney disease COPD and other lung diseases Sleep apnea Race. AFib is more common in people with European ancestry. Recent surgery. You may be at risk of atrial fibrillation in the early days and weeks after surgery on your heart , lungs, or esophagus. What are the symptoms of atrial fibrillation (AFib)? Some people who have AFib don't have any symptoms and don't know they have it. If you do have symptoms, you may only notice them once in a while. Or you may have symptoms that are more frequent. And in some cases, the symptoms might be severe. If you have heart disease, you are more likely to notice your symptoms. And those symptoms could get worse if your heart disease gets worse. The symptoms of AFib can include: Extreme fatigue, which is the most common symptom Heart palpitations (the feeling that your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, pounding, or beating too hard or too fast) Trouble breathing , especially when lying down or when exercising Chest pain Dizziness or fainting Low blood pressure What other problems can AFib cause? If AFib is not treated, it can lead to serious health problems (complications) such as: Stroke Heart failure Blood clots Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) Cognitive impairment and dementia To help prevent these problems, it's important to contact your health care provider if you are having symptoms. If you do have AFib, the sooner you are diagnosed and treated, the better. How is atrial fibrillation (AFib) diagnosed? To find out if you have AFib, your provider: Will ask about your medical history, including your symptoms, lifestyle, and any other health conditions you may have Will ask about your family history, to find out if you have relatives who have or had AFib Will do a physical exam May order blood tests Will likely order heart tests , such as an electrocardiogram (also called an EKG or ECG) and echocardiogram May ask you to wear a heart monitor device that records your heart's electrical activity What are the treatments for atrial fibrillation (AFib)? The treatments for AFib may include: Blood thinner medicines that help prevent blood clots from forming. Medicines to control your heart's rhythm and rate. Following heart-healthy lifestyle changes , such as: Following a heart-healthy eating plan that limits saturated fats , salt , and cholesterol . An example is the DASH eating plan . Limiting or avoiding alcohol , because it can increase your heart rate. Aiming for a healthy weight . Getting regular physical activity . Managing stress . Quitting smoking . Procedures such as: Electrical cardioversion, which restores your heart rhythm using low-energy shocks to your heart. Catheter ablation, which scars the tissue that is causing the arrhythmia. The scar tissue blocks the abnormal heart signals. Surgeries such as: Surgery to put in a pacemaker to help control the arrhythmia. A Maze procedure, which creates scar tissue in a maze-like pattern in certain parts of the heart. Left atrial appendage closure, a surgery on a small sac in the muscle wall of your left atrium (the upper left chamber of your heart). It helps prevent blood clots and can reduce your risk of stroke. This surgery is for people who are not able to take blood thinners. Can atrial fibrillation (AFib) be prevented? There are steps you can take to help lower your risk of atrial fibrillation, such as: Making heart-healthy lifestyle changes: Following a heart-healthy eating plan Limiting or avoiding alcohol Aiming for a healthy weight Getting regular physical activity Managing stress Not smoking Avoiding illegal drugs, such as cocaine and methamphetamines Taking antiarrhythmic medicine (medicine to treat arrhythmia) if you are having heart surgery Treating any health conditions that could raise your risk of AFib NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Normally, if you get hurt, your body forms a blood clot to stop the bleeding . For blood to clot, your body needs cells called platelets and proteins known as clotting factors. If 
you have a bleeding disorder, you either do not have enough platelets or clotting factors 
or they don't work the way they should. Bleeding disorders can be the result of other diseases, such as severe liver disease or a lack of vitamin K . They can also be inherited. Hemophilia is an inherited bleeding disorder. Bleeding disorders can also be a side effect of medicines such as blood thinners . Various blood tests can check for a bleeding disorder. You will also have a physical exam and history. Treatments depend on the cause. They may include medicines and transfusions of blood , platelets, or clotting factor.

Your blood is made up of liquid and solids. The liquid part, called plasma, is made of water, salts, and protein. Over half of your blood is plasma. The solid part of your blood contains red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Red blood cells (RBC) deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs. White blood cells (WBC) fight infection and are part of your immune system. Platelets help blood to clot when you have a cut or wound. Bone marrow, the spongy material inside your bones, makes new blood cells. Blood cells constantly die and your body makes new ones. Red blood cells live about 120 days, and platelets live about 6 days. Some white blood cells live less than a day, but others live much longer. There are four blood types: A, B, AB, or O. Also, blood is either Rh-positive or Rh-negative. So if you have type A blood, it's either A positive or A negative. Which type you are is important if you need a blood transfusion . And your Rh factor could be important if you become pregnant - an incompatibility between your type and the baby's could create problems. Blood tests such as blood count tests help doctors check for certain diseases and conditions. They also help check the function of your organs and show how well treatments are working. Problems with your blood may include bleeding disorders , excessive clotting and platelet disorders . If you lose too much blood, you may need a transfusion. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is a blood clot? A blood clot is a mass of blood that forms when platelets , proteins, and cells in the blood stick together. When you get hurt, your body forms a blood clot to stop the bleeding .  After the bleeding stops and healing takes place, your body usually breaks down and removes the blood clot. But sometimes the blood clots form where they shouldn't, your body makes too many blood clots or abnormal blood clots, or the blood clots don't break down like they should. These blood clots can be dangerous and may cause other health problems. Blood clots can form in, or travel to, the blood vessels in the limbs, lungs, brain, heart, and kidneys. The types of problems blood clots can cause will depend on where they are: Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a blood clot in a deep vein, usually in the lower leg, thigh, or pelvis. It can block a vein and cause damage to your leg. A pulmonary embolism (PE) can happen when a DVT breaks off and travels through the bloodstream to the lungs. A PE, especially if it is large, can damage your lungs and prevent your other organs from getting enough oxygen. Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) is a rare blood clot in the venous sinuses in your brain. Normally the venous sinuses drain blood from your brain. CVST blocks the blood from draining and can cause a hemorrhagic stroke . Blood clots in other parts of the body can cause problems such as an ischemic stroke , a heart attack , kidney problems , kidney failure , and pregnancy-related problems . Who is more likely to develop blood clots? Certain factors can raise your risk of developing blood clots: Atherosclerosis Atrial fibrillation Being overweight or having obesity Cancer and cancer treatments Certain genetic disorders Certain surgeries COVID-19 Diabetes Family history of blood clots Overweight and obesity Pregnancy and giving birth Serious injuries Some medicines, including birth control pills Smoking Staying in one position for a long time, such as being in the hospital or taking a long car or plane ride What are the symptoms of blood clots? The symptoms for blood clots can be different, depending on where the blood clot is: In the abdomen: Abdominal pain , nausea and vomiting In an arm or leg: Sudden or gradual pain, swelling, tenderness, and warmth In the lungs: Shortness of breath, pain with deep breathing, rapid breathing, and increased heart rate In the brain: Trouble speaking , vision problems , seizures , weakness on one side of the body, and sudden severe headache In the heart: Chest pain , sweating, shortness of breath, and pain in the left arm How are blood clots diagnosed? To find out if you have one or more blood clots, your health care provider: Will do a physical exam. Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. May order blood tests, including a D-dimer test . May order imaging tests , such as Ultrasound . X-rays of the veins (venography) or blood vessels (angiography) that are taken after you get an injection of special dye. The dye shows up on the x-ray and allows the provider to see how the blood flows. CT Scan . What are the treatments for blood clots? Treatments for blood clots depend on where the blood clot is located and how severe it is. Treatments may include: Blood thinners . Other medicines, including thrombolytics. Thrombolytics are medicines that dissolve blood clots. They are usually used where the blood clots are severe. Surgery and other procedures to remove the blood clots Can blood clots be prevented? You may be able to help prevent blood clots by: Moving around as soon as possible after having been confined to your bed, such as after surgery, illness, or injury Getting up and moving around every few hours when you have to sit for long periods of time, for example if you are on a long flight or car trip Wearing compression stockings after surgery or during a long flight Regular physical activity Not smoking Staying at a healthy weight Some people at high risk may need to take blood thinners to prevent blood clots.

Your blood contains red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC), and platelets. Blood count tests measure the number and types of cells in your blood. This helps doctors check on your overall health. The tests can also help to diagnose diseases and conditions such as anemia , infections, clotting problems, blood cancers, and immune system disorders . Specific types include tests for: RBC - the numbers, size, and types of RBC in the blood WBC - the numbers and types of WBC in the blood Platelets - the numbers and size of the platelets Hemoglobin - an iron-rich protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen Hematocrit - how much space red blood cells take up in your blood Reticulocyte count - how many young red blood cells are in your blood Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) - the average size of your red blood cells The complete blood count (CBC) includes most or all of these. The CBC is one of the most common blood tests. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Your blood is living tissue made up of liquid and solids. The liquid part, called plasma, is made of water, salts and protein. Over half of your blood is plasma. The solid part of your blood contains red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. Blood disorders affect one or more parts of the blood and prevent your blood from doing its job.  They can be acute or chronic. Many blood disorders are inherited. Other causes include other diseases, side effects of medicines, and a lack of certain nutrients in your diet. Types of blood disorders include: Platelet disorders , excessive clotting , and bleeding problems , which affect how your blood clots Anemia , which happens when your blood does not carry enough oxygen to the rest of your body Cancers of the blood, such as leukemia and myeloma Eosinophilic disorders , which are problems with one type of white blood cell.

Every year, millions of people in the United States receive life-saving blood transfusions.  During a transfusion, you receive whole blood or parts of blood such as: Red blood cells - cells that carry oxygen to and from tissues and organs Platelets - cells that form clots to control bleeding Plasma - the liquid part of the blood that helps clotting. You may need it if you have been badly burned, have liver failure or a severe infection. Most blood transfusions go very smoothly.  Some infectious agents, such as HIV, can survive in blood and infect the person receiving the blood transfusion. To keep blood safe, blood banks carefully screen donated blood. The risk of catching a virus from a blood transfusion is low. Sometimes it is possible to have a transfusion of your own blood. During surgery, you may need a blood transfusion because of blood loss. If you are having a surgery that you're able to schedule months in advance, your doctor may ask whether you would like to use your own blood, instead of donated blood. If so, you will need to have blood drawn one or more times before the surgery. A blood bank will store your blood for your use. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A brain aneurysm is an abnormal bulge or "ballooning" in the wall of an artery in the brain. They are sometimes called berry aneurysms because they are often the size of a small berry. Most brain aneurysms produce no symptoms until they become large, begin to leak blood, or burst. If a brain aneurysm presses on nerves in your brain, it can cause signs and symptoms. These can include: A droopy eyelid Double vision or other changes in vision Pain above or behind the eye A dilated pupil Numbness or weakness on one side of the face or body Treatment depends on the size and location of the aneurysm, whether it is infected, and whether it has burst. If a brain aneurysm bursts, symptoms can include a sudden, severe headache, nausea and vomiting, stiff neck, loss of consciousness, and signs of a stroke . Any of these symptoms requires immediate medical attention. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Cardiomyopathy is the name for diseases of the heart muscle. These diseases enlarge your heart muscle or make it thicker and more rigid than normal. In rare cases, scar tissue replaces the muscle tissue. Some people live long, healthy lives with cardiomyopathy. Some people don't even realize they have it. In others, however, it can make the heart less able to pump blood through the body. This can cause serious complications, including: Heart failure Abnormal heart rhythms Heart valve problems Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) Heart attacks , high blood pressure , infections, and other diseases can all cause cardiomyopathy. Some types of cardiomyopathy run in families. In many people, however, the cause is unknown. Treatment might involve medicines, surgery, other medical procedures, and lifestyle changes. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Your carotid arteries are two large blood vessels in your neck. They supply your brain and head with blood.  If you have carotid artery disease, the arteries become narrow or blocked, usually because of atherosclerosis . Atherosclerosis is the buildup of plaque, which is made up of fat, cholesterol , calcium, and other substances found in the blood. Carotid artery disease is serious because it can block the blood flow to your brain, causing a stroke . Too much plaque in the artery can cause a blockage. You can also have a blockage when a piece of plaque or a blood clot breaks off the wall of an artery. The plaque or clot can travel through the bloodstream and get stuck in one of your brain's smaller arteries. Carotid artery disease often does not cause symptoms until the blockage or narrowing is severe.  One sign may be a bruit (whooshing sound) that your doctor hears when listening to your artery with a stethoscope. Another sign is a transient ischemic attack (TIA), a "mini-stroke." A TIA is like a stroke, but it only lasts a few minutes, and the symptoms usually go away within an hour. Stroke is another sign. Imaging tests can confirm whether you have carotid artery disease. Treatments may include: Healthy lifestyle changes Medicines Carotid endarterectomy, surgery to remove the plaque Angioplasty , a procedure to place a balloon and stent into the artery to open it and hold it open NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Having a pain in your chest can be scary.  It does not always mean that you are having a heart attack .  There can be many other causes, including: Other heart problems, such as angina Panic attacks Digestive problems, such as heartburn or esophagus disorders Sore muscles Lung diseases, such as pneumonia , pleurisy , or pulmonary embolism Costochondritis - an inflammation of joints in your chest Some of these problems can be serious.  Get immediate medical care if you have chest pain that does not go away, crushing pain or pressure in the chest, or chest pain along with nausea, sweating, dizziness or shortness of breath. Treatment depends on the cause of the pain.

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What are the types of leukemia in children? There are different types of leukemia. Some types are acute (fast growing). They usually get worse quickly if they are not treated. Most childhood leukemias are acute: Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) , which is the most common type of leukemia in children and the most common cancer in children . In ALL, the bone marrow makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) , which happens when bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. Other types of leukemia are chronic (slow growing). They usually get worse over a longer period of time. They are rare in children: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is more common in teens than children. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal granulocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is very rare in children. There are some other rare types of leukemia in children, including juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). What causes leukemia in children? Leukemia happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia. Who is at risk for leukemia in children? The factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia include: Having a brother or sister, especially a twin, with leukemia Past treatment with chemotherapy Exposure to radiation , including radiation therapy Having certain genetic conditions , such as Ataxia telangiectasia Down syndrome Fanconi anemia Li-Fraumeni syndrome Neurofibromatosis type 1 There are other factors that may raise the risk of getting one or more of the specific types of childhood leukemia. What are the symptoms of leukemia in children? Some of the symptoms of leukemia may include: Feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Weight loss or loss of appetite Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Other leukemia symptoms can be different from type to type. Chronic leukemia may not cause symptoms at first. How is leukemia in children diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose leukemia: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) Bone marrow tests. There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes Once there is a diagnosis of leukemia, other tests may be done to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture, which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for leukemia in children? The treatments for leukemia depend on which type it is, how severe the leukemia is, the child's age, and other factors. Possible treatments might include: chemotherapy radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Treatment for childhood leukemia is often successful. But the treatments can cause complications right away or later in life. Children who survived leukemia will need follow-up care the rest of their lives to watch for and treat any complications they may have. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a type of chronic leukemia. "Chronic" means that the leukemia usually gets worse slowly. In CLL, the bone marrow makes abnormal lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). When the abnormal cells crowd out the healthy cells, it can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding . The abnormal cells can also spread outside the blood to other parts of the body.
CLL is one of the most common types of leukemia in adults. It often occurs during or after middle age. It is rare in children . What causes chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? CLL happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown, so it's hard to predict who might get CLL. There are a few factors that might raise your risk. Who is at risk for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? It is hard to predict who will get CLL. There are a few factors that could raise your risk: Age - your risk goes up as you get older. Most people who are diagnosed with CLL are over 50. Family history of CLL and other blood and bone marrow diseases Racial/ethnic group - CLL is more common in whites than in people from other racial or ethnic groups Exposure to certain chemicals, including Agent Orange, a chemical that was used in the Vietnam War What are the symptoms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? In the beginning, CLL does not cause any symptoms. Later, you can have symptoms such as: Swollen lymph nodes - you may notice them as painless lumps in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin Weakness or feeling tired Pain or a feeling of fullness below the ribs Fever and infection Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Weight loss for no known reason Drenching night sweats How is chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose CLL: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) with differential and blood chemistry tests. Blood chemistry tests measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and an electrolyte panel . Flow cytometry tests, which check for leukemia cells and identify which type of leukemia it is. The tests can be done on blood, bone marrow, or other tissue. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with CLL, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and bone marrow tests . What are the treatments for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? Treatments for CLL include: Watchful waiting, which means that you don't get treatment right away. Your health care provider regularly checks to see if your signs or symptoms appear or change. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Immunotherapy Chemotherapy with bone marrow or stem cell transplant The goals of treatment are to slow the growth of the leukemia cells and to give you long periods of remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The CLL may come back after remission, and you may need more treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of chronic leukemia. "Chronic" means that the leukemia usually gets worse slowly. In CML, the bone marrow makes abnormal granulocytes (a type of white blood cell). These abnormal cells are also called blasts. When the abnormal cells crowd out the healthy cells, it can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding . The abnormal cells can also spread outside the blood to other parts of the body. CML usually occurs in adults during or after middle age. It is rare in children . What causes chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? Most people with CML have a genetic change called the Philadelphia chromosome. It's called that because researchers in Philadelphia discovered it. People normally have 23 pairs of chromosomes in each cell. These chromosomes contain your DNA (genetic material). In CML, part of the DNA from one chromosome moves to another chromosome. It combines with some DNA there, which creates a new gene called BCR-ABL. This gene causes your bone marrow to make an abnormal protein. This protein allows the leukemia cells to grow out of control. The Philadelphia chromosome isn't passed from parent to child. It happens during your lifetime. The cause is unknown. Who is at risk for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? It is hard to predict who will get CML. There are a few factors that could raise your risk: Age - your risk goes up as you get older Gender - CML is slightly more common in men Exposure to high-dose radiation What are the symptoms of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? Sometimes CML does not cause symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they can include: Feeling very tired Weight loss for no known reason Drenching night sweats Fever Pain or a feeling of fullness below the ribs on the left side How is chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose CML: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) with differential and blood chemistry tests. Blood chemistry tests measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and an electrolyte panel . Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes, including tests to look for the Philadelphia chromosome If you are diagnosed with CML, you may have additional tests such as imaging tests to see whether the cancer has spread. What are the phases of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? CML has three phases. The phases are based on how much the CML has grown or spread: Chronic phase, where less than 10% of cells in the blood and bone marrow are blast cells (leukemia cells). Most people are diagnosed in this phase, and many do not have symptoms. Standard treatment usually helps in this phase. Accelerated phase, 10% to 19% of the cells in the blood and bone marrow are blast cells. In this phase, people often have symptoms and standard treatment may not be as effective as in the chronic phase. Blastic phase, where 20% or more of the cells in the blood or bone marrow are blast cells. The blast cells have spread to other tissues and organs. If you have tiredness, fever, and an enlarged spleen during the blastic phase, it is called a blast crisis. This phase is harder to treat. What are the treatments for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? There are several different treatments for CML: Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. For CML, the drugs are tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). They block tyrosine kinase, which is an enzyme that causes your bone marrow to make too many blasts. Chemotherapy Immunotherapy High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI). DLI is a treatment that may be used after a stem cell transplant. It involves giving you an infusion (into your bloodstream) of healthy lymphocytes from the stem cell transplant donor. Lymphocytes are a type of white blood cell. These donor lymphocytes may kill the remaining cancer cells. Surgery to remove the spleen (splenectomy) Which treatments you get will depend on which phase you are in, your age, your overall health, and other factors. When the signs and symptoms of CML are reduced or have disappeared, it is called remission. The CML may come back after remission, and you may need more treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What are congenital heart defects? Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are problems with the structure of the heart. "Congenital" means that that the problems are present at birth. These defects happen when a baby's heart doesn't develop normally during pregnancy. Congenital heart defects are the most common type of birth defect . Congenital heart defects can change the way the heart pumps blood. They may make blood flow too slowly, go the wrong way, or block it completely. There are many types of congenital heart defects. They can happen in one or more parts of the heart. The most common types are: Septal defects ("hole in the heart") - openings in the wall between the left and right sides of the heart Heart valve defects - problems with the valves that control the flow of blood through the heart Defects in the large blood vessels that carry blood in and out of the heart Congenital heart defects can range from very mild problems that never need treatment to life-threatening problems at birth. The most serious congenital heart defects are called critical congenital heart disease . Babies with these defects usually need surgery in the first year of life. But the symptoms of milder heart defects may not show up until childhood or adulthood. What causes congenital heart defects? Researchers often don't know what causes congenital heart defects. They do know that changes in a baby's genes sometimes cause a heart defect. The changed genes may come from the parents, or the changes may happen during pregnancy. Who is more likely to have a baby with a congenital heart defect? Several things may increase the chance that your baby has a congenital heart defect, such as: Your health before and during pregnancy , including: Having diabetes before pregnancy or developing it in the first 3 months of pregnancy (diabetes that develops later in pregnancy isn't a major risk for heart defects). Carefully controlling your blood sugar before and during pregnancy can lower your baby's risk of congenital heart defects. Having phenylketonuria (PKU) , a rare inherited disorder that affects how the body uses a protein in foods. If you have PKU, eating a low-protein diet before getting pregnant can lower your baby's risk of having a congenital heart defect. Having rubella (German measles) during pregnancy. Your contact with certain substances during pregnancy , including: Smoking or secondhand smoke (breathing smoke from another smoker). Certain medicines , such as angiotensin-converting (ACE) inhibitors for high blood pressure and retinoic acids for acne. If you're pregnant or plan to get pregnant, talk with your health care provider about all the medicines you take. Your family history and genetics. In most cases, congenital heart defects don't run in families. But your chance of having a baby with a congenital heart defect does go up if you or the other parent has a congenital heart defect, or if you already have a child with a congenital heart defect. What are the symptoms of congenital heart defects? Congenital heart defects don't cause pain. The signs and symptoms are different, depending on the type and number of defects and how serious they are. Common signs and symptoms of congenital heart defects include: Cyanosis - a bluish color to the skin, lips, and fingernails. It happens when there isn't enough oxygen in the blood. Fatigue - your baby may be unusually sleepy and may become very tired during feedings. Poor blood flow. Fast or difficult breathing. Heart murmur - an unusual sound between heartbeats. What other problems do congenital heart defects cause? Congenital heart defects don't always cause other problems. If they do, which problems you have would depend on the type and number of defects and how serious the defects are. Children with congenital heart defects are more likely to: Be smaller than other children Have problems or delays in mental, and emotional growth, and behavior, such as: Speech and language problems Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) People with congenital heart defects may develop other health conditions, including: Endocarditis - an infection of lining of the heart and valves Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to the body Pulmonary hypertension - high blood pressure in your lungs Kidney and liver disease How are congenital heart defects diagnosed? Before a baby is born , your provider may use ultrasound pictures of the baby's heart to look for heart defects. This is called a fetal echocardiogram. It's done between weeks 18 and 22 of pregnancy. During the first few days after birth , all newborns are checked for congenital heart defects. A pulse oximeter is clipped to your baby's hands or feet to measure blood oxygen. If it shows low levels of blood oxygen, more tests will be needed to find out if your baby has a heart defect. To diagnose congenital heart defects in babies, children, and adults , a provider may use many tools, including: A physical exam. Certain heart tests to see how the heart is working. Genetic testing to see if certain gene problems caused the defect. What are the treatments for congenital heart defects? Treatment depends on the type of congenital heart defect and how serious it is. Possible treatments include: Cardiac catheterization to repair simple defects, such as a small hole in the inside wall of the heart. A catheterization uses a thin tube guided through a vein and into the heart. Heart surgery may be needed to: Repair defects in the heart and blood vessels. Repair or replace a heart valve. Place a device in the chest to help the heart pump blood. Do a heart transplant . Medicine is often used if your baby has a specific type of congenital heart defect called patent ductus arteriosus. All children and adults who have congenital heart defects need regular follow-up care from a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) throughout their life, even if their defect was repaired. Some people may need several heart surgeries or catheterizations over the years. They may also need to take medicines to help their hearts work as well as possible. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

In coronary artery disease (CAD), the arteries that supply blood and oxygen to your heart muscle grow hardened and narrowed. You may try treatments such as lifestyle changes, medicines, and angioplasty , a procedure to open the arteries.  If these treatments don't help, you may need coronary artery bypass surgery. The surgery creates a new path for blood to flow to the heart.  The surgeon takes a healthy piece of vein from the leg or artery from the chest or wrist.  Then the surgeon attaches it to the coronary artery, just above and below the narrowed area or blockage. This allows blood to bypass (get around) the blockage. Sometimes people need more than one bypass. The results of the surgery usually are excellent. Many people remain symptom-free for many years. You may need surgery again if blockages form in the grafted arteries or veins or in arteries that weren't blocked before.  Lifestyle changes and medicines may help prevent arteries from becoming clogged again. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common type of heart disease. It is the leading cause of death in the United States in both men and women. CAD happens when the arteries that supply blood to heart muscle become hardened and narrowed. This is due to the buildup of cholesterol and other material, called plaque, on their inner walls. This buildup is called atherosclerosis . As it grows, less blood can flow through the arteries. As a result, the heart muscle can't get the blood or oxygen it needs. This can lead to chest pain ( angina ) or a heart attack .  Most heart attacks happen when a blood clot suddenly cuts off the hearts' blood supply, causing permanent heart damage. Over time, CAD can also weaken the heart muscle and contribute to heart failure and arrhythmias . Heart failure means the heart can't pump blood well to the rest of the body. Arrhythmias are changes in the normal beating rhythm of the heart. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Deep vein thrombosis, or DVT, is a blood clot that forms in a vein deep in the body. Most deep vein clots occur in the lower leg or thigh. If the vein swells, the condition is called thrombophlebitis. A deep vein thrombosis can break loose and cause a serious problem in the lung,  called a pulmonary embolism . Sitting still for a long time can make you more likely to get a DVT. Some medicines and disorders that increase your risk for blood clots can also lead to DVTs. Common symptoms are : Warmth and tenderness over the vein Pain or swelling in the part of the body affected Skin redness Treatment includes medicines to ease pain and inflammation, break up clots and keep new clots from forming. Keeping the affected area raised and applying moist heat can also help. If you are taking a long car or plane trip, take a break, walk or stretch your legs and drink plenty of liquids.

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose can't get into your cells as quickly as usual. The glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. How does diabetes cause foot problems? Foot problems are common in people with diabetes. They can happen over time when high blood sugar damages the nerves and blood vessels in the feet. The nerve damage, called diabetic neuropathy , can cause numbness, tingling, pain, or a loss of feeling in your feet. If you can't feel pain, you may not know when you have a cut, blister , or ulcer (open sore) on your foot. A wound like that could get infected. The infection may not heal well because the damaged blood vessels can cause poor blood flow in your feet. Having an infection and poor blood flow can lead to gangrene . That means the muscle, skin, and other tissues start to die. If you have gangrene or a foot ulcer that does not get better with treatment, you may need an amputation . This is a surgery to cut off your damaged toe, foot, or part of your leg. It may prevent a bad infection from spreading and could save your life. But there's a lot you can do to prevent a foot wound from becoming a major health problem. How can I protect my feet if I have diabetes? The best way to protect your feet is by controlling your blood sugar levels every day. This will help keep nerve and blood vessel damage from getting worse. The next step is to keep the skin of your feet healthy. Good foot care for people with diabetes includes: Checking your feet every day. Look for cuts, redness, and other changes in the skin and toenails, including warts or other spots that your shoes could rub. Make sure to check the bottoms of your feet too. Washing your feet every day. Use warm water and soap. Don't soak your feet because that can dry out your skin. After you dry your feet, you can use talcum powder or cornstarch between your toes. They soak up moisture that can cause infection. If you use lotion, don't apply it between your toes. Asking your doctor how to remove corns and calluses safely. Thick skin on your feet can rub and lead to sores. But removing it the wrong way could damage your skin. So you don't want to cut the skin or use medicated pads or liquid removers. Trimming your toenails straight across with a clipper. If it's hard for you to trim your own toenails, or if they're thick or curve into the skin, have a podiatrist (foot doctor) do it for you. Always wearing well-fitting shoes and socks or slippers to protect your feet when walking. You don't want to walk barefoot, even indoors. And be sure your shoes are smooth inside. A seam or pebble could rub your skin raw. Protecting your feet from heat and cold. Use sunscreen on exposed skin and don't walk barefoot at the beach. In cold weather, wear warm socks instead of warming your feet near a heater or fireplace. Keeping the blood flowing in your feet. Put your feet up when you're sitting. Wiggle your toes and circle your feet throughout the day. Don't wear tight socks. And get plenty of activity that's not too hard on the feet, such as walking. Getting your feet checked at your health care visits. Even if you haven't noticed a problem, it's good to have your health care provider look at your feet. When should I see my health care provider about diabetic foot problems? Serious foot problems can develop quickly. See your health care provider right away if you notice: A cut, blister, or bruise on your feet that doesn't start to heal in a few days Red, warm, or painful skin on your feet A callus with dried blood inside A foot infection that becomes black and smells bad that could be gangrene Remember, controlling your blood sugar and caring for your feet every day are the best steps you can take to prevent serious diabetic foot problems. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. What is diabetic heart disease? Diabetic heart disease is a term for heart disease in people who have diabetes. If you have diabetes, you are much more likely to develop heart disease or have a stroke than people who don't have diabetes. And you may start having these problems at a younger age. Over time, the effects of high blood sugar from diabetes can include damage to the blood vessels and nerves in your heart. This damage increases your chance of developing heart diseases, including: Coronary artery disease (CAD) . It happens slowly as a sticky material called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. Heart failure . With this condition, your heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet the needs of your body. Cardiomyopathy . This is a group of diseases in which the heart muscle may become thick or stiff. Who is more likely to develop diabetic heart disease? Diabetes puts you at serious risk for heart disease. It also makes you more likely to develop other conditions that raise your risk even more, including: High blood pressure High blood levels of LDL "bad" cholesterol High triglycerides (a type of fat in your blood) with low blood levels of HDL "good" cholesterol Your risk for heart disease is also higher if you Are male Smoke Have obesity Have too much belly fat around your waist, even though you're at a healthy weight: For men, that's a waist more than 40 inches For women, that's a waist more than 35 inches Have a family history of heart disease Have chronic kidney disease What are the symptoms of diabetic heart disease? In the early stages, heart disease usually doesn't have any symptoms. But if your heart disease worsens, you can have symptoms. Your symptoms will depend on the type of heart disease you have. They might include: Shortness of breath Fatigue Dizziness or fainting Arrhythmia (problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat) Swollen feet and ankles Chest pain It's important to know that people with diabetes may not feel chest pain. That's because diabetes can damage the nerves in your heart. If you have any symptoms that could be heart disease, talk with your health care provider. How is diabetic heart disease diagnosed? To find out if you have diabetic heart disease, your provider will: Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms and other health conditions you may have Ask about your family history , to find out if you have relatives who have or had heart disease Do a physical exam Likely run some tests to help understand your personal risk for heart disease , including: Blood tests to check your cholesterol , triglycerides , and blood sugar levels A blood-pressure check Heart tests , if needed Depending on your risk level, your provider may send you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for care. If you do have heart disease, treatment will depend on the type of heart disease you have. How can I prevent diabetic heart disease? You may be able to prevent heart disease or keep it from getting worse by working with your provider to: Control your blood sugar levels Manage other conditions you may have that can raise your risk for heart disease Take any medicines your provider prescribed Make heart-healthy habits part of your daily life Follow a healthy eating plan for diabetes NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Eosinophils are a type of white blood cell. They help fight off infections and play a role in your body's immune response.  They can also build up and cause inflammation. Normally your blood doesn't have a large number of eosinophils.  Your body may produce more of them in response to: Allergic disorders Skin conditions Parasitic and fungal infections Autoimmune diseases Some cancers Bone marrow disorders In some conditions, the eosinophils can move outside the bloodstream and build up in organs and tissues. This can happen in many different parts of the body, including the esophagus , heart, lungs, blood, and intestines. Treatment of eosinophilic disorders can vary, depending on the cause and which part of the body is affected. Steroids are often part of the treatment.

What is eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE)? Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic disease of the esophagus. Your esophagus is the muscular tube that carries food and liquids from your mouth to the stomach. If you have EoE, white blood cells called eosinophils build up in your esophagus. This causes damage and inflammation, which can cause pain, trouble swallowing , and food getting stuck in your throat. EoE is rare. But because it is a newly recognized disease, it is being diagnosed more often. Some people who think that they have reflux (GERD) may actually have EoE. What causes eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE)? Researchers are not certain about the exact cause of EoE. They think that it is an immune system/allergic reaction to foods or to substances in your environment, such as dust mites, animal dander, pollen, and molds. Certain genes may also play a role in EoE. Who is at risk for eosinophilic esophagitis(EoE)? EoE can affect anyone, but it is more common in people who: Are male Have other allergic diseases, such as hay fever , eczema , asthma and food allergies Have family members with EoE What are the symptoms of eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE)? The most common symptoms of EoE can depend on your age. In infants and toddlers: : Feeding problems Vomiting Poor weight gain and growth Reflux that does not get better with medicines In older children: : Vomiting Abdominal pain Trouble swallowing, especially with solid foods Reflux that does not get better with medicines Poor appetite In adults: : Trouble swallowing, especially with solid foods Food getting stuck in the esophagus Reflux that does not get better with medicines Heartburn Chest pain How is eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) diagnosed? To find out if you have EoE, your doctor will likely: Ask about your symptoms and medical history. Since other conditions can have the same symptoms of EoE, it is important for your doctor to take a thorough history. Do an upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy. An endoscope is a long, flexible tube with a light and camera at the end of it. Your doctor will run the endoscope down your esophagus and look at it. Some signs that you might have EoE include white spots, rings, narrowing, and inflammation in the esophagus. However, not everyone with EoE has those signs, and sometimes they can be signs of a different esophagus disorder . Do a biopsy. During the endoscopy, the doctor will take small tissue samples from your esophagus. The samples will be checked for a high number of eosinophils. This is the only way to make a diagnosis of EoE. Do other tests as needed. You may have blood tests to check for other conditions. If you do have EoE, you may have blood or other types of tests to check for specific allergies. What are the treatments for eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE)? There is no cure for EoE. Treatments can manage your symptoms and prevent further damage. The two main types of treatments are medicines and diet. Medicines used to treat EoE are: Steroids, which can help control inflammation. These are usually topical steroids, which you swallow either from an inhaler or as a liquid. Sometimes doctors prescribe oral steroids (pills) to treat people who have serious swallowing problems or weight loss. Acid suppressors such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which may help with reflux symptoms and decrease inflammation. Monoclonal antibodies, which can reduce inflammation and may help with swallowing. They can be used in adults and children over age 12. Dietary changes for EoE include: Elimination diet. If you are on an elimination diet, you stop eating and drinking certain foods and beverages for several weeks. If you are feeling better, you add the foods back to your diet one at a time. You have repeat endoscopies to see whether or not you are tolerating those foods. There are different types of elimination diets: With one type, you first have an allergy test . Then you stop eating and drinking the foods you are allergic to. For another type, you eliminate foods and drinks that commonly cause allergies, such as dairy products, egg, wheat, soy, peanuts, tree nuts and fish/shellfish. Elemental diet. With this diet, you stop eating and drinking all proteins. Instead, you drink an amino acid formula. Some people who do not like the taste of the formula use a feeding tube instead. If your symptoms and inflammation go away completely, you may be able to try adding foods back one at a time, to see whether you can tolerate them. Which treatment your doctor suggests depends on different factors, including your age. Some people may use more than one kind of treatment. Researchers are still trying to understand EoE and how best to treat it. If your treatment is not working well enough and you have narrowing of the esophagus, you may need dilation. This is a procedure to stretch the esophagus. This makes it easier for you to swallow.

Giant cell arteritis is a disorder that causes inflammation of your arteries, usually in the scalp, neck, and arms. It narrows the arteries, which keeps blood from flowing well. Giant cell arteritis often occurs with another disorder called polymyalgia rheumatica . Both are more common in women than in men. They almost always affect people over the age of 50. Early symptoms of giant cell arteritis resemble the flu:  fatigue, loss of appetite, and fever. Other symptoms include: Headaches Pain and tenderness over the temples Double vision or visual loss, dizziness Problems with coordination and balance Pain in your jaw and tongue Your doctor will make the diagnosis based on your medical history, symptoms, and a physical exam. There is no specific test for giant cell arteritis, but you may have tests that measure inflammation. Treatment is usually with corticosteroids . Early treatment is important; otherwise there is a risk of permanent vision loss or stroke.  However, when properly treated, giant cell arteritis rarely comes back. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Each year almost 800,000 Americans have a heart attack. A heart attack happens when blood flow to the heart suddenly becomes blocked. Without the blood coming in, the heart can't get oxygen. If not treated quickly, the heart muscle begins to die. But if you do get quick treatment, you may be able to prevent or limit damage to the heart muscle. That's why it's important to know the symptoms of a heart attack and call 911 if you or someone else is having them. You should call, even if you are not sure that it is a heart attack. The most common symptoms in men and women are: Chest discomfort. It is often in center or left side of the chest. It usually lasts more than a few minutes. It may go away and come back. It can feel like pressure, squeezing, fullness, or pain . It also can feel like heartburn or indigestion. Shortness of breath. Sometimes this is your only symptom. You may get it before or during the chest discomfort. It can happen when you are resting or doing a little bit of physical activity. Discomfort in the upper body. You may feel pain or discomfort in one or both arms, the back, shoulders, neck, jaw, or upper part of the stomach. You may also have other symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and lightheadedness. You may break out in a cold sweat. Sometimes women will have different symptoms then men. For example, they are more likely to feel tired for no reason. The most common cause of heart attacks is coronary artery disease (CAD). With CAD, there is a buildup of cholesterol and other material, called plaque, on their inner walls or the arteries. This is atherosclerosis . It can build up for years. Eventually an area of plaque can rupture (break open). A blood clot can form around the plaque and block the artery. A less common cause of heart attack is a severe spasm (tightening) of a coronary artery. The spasm cuts off blood flow through the artery. At the hospital, health care providers make a diagnosis based on your symptoms, blood tests, and different heart health tests . Treatments may include medicines and medical procedures such as coronary angioplasty . After a heart attack, cardiac rehabilitation and lifestyle changes can help you recover. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is heart disease? Heart disease is a general term that includes many types of heart problems. It's also called cardiovascular disease, which means heart and blood vessel disease. Coronary artery disease (also called coronary heart disease) is the most common type of heart disease in both men and women. It happens slowly over time when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. The plaque narrows or blocks blood flow to the heart muscle and can lead to: Angina - chest pain from lack of blood flow Heart attacks - when part of the heart muscle dies from loss of blood flow Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat How does heart disease affect women? In the United States, heart disease is the number one cause of death in women. But women are often not diagnosed with heart disease as quickly as men are. That's because: Women are more likely than men to have "silent" heart disease, meaning that they don't have symptoms. Health care providers may not recognize heart disease in women because women's symptoms may be different from men's symptoms. Women are more likely than men to have certain types of heart disease that can be harder to diagnose. A delay in diagnosis may mean a delay in medical care that could help prevent serious problems, such as a heart attack. That's why it's important to learn about your risk for heart disease, the symptoms in women, and how to keep your heart healthy. What types of heart disease do women get? Women can get any type of heart disease. Like men, the most common type of heart disease among women is coronary artery disease. But there are certain types of heart disease which are less common, but affect women more often than men: Coronary microvascular disease - Chest pain from spasms (sudden tightening) in the smallest arteries of the heart that pinch off blood flow. It typically happens during rest or routine activities. This serious condition increases your risk of having a heart attack or other heart diseases.  This type may be harder to diagnose since blockages in smaller arteries can be harder to see on imaging tests. Broken heart syndrome - Strong chest pain or other signs that look like a heart attack. It's caused by the stress of powerful emotions, such as deep grief, anger, or surprise. It can happen even if you're healthy. It mostly affects women after menopause and usually doesn't cause any lasting damage. Variant angina - A rare type of strong chest pain from spasms in the heart arteries. The pain usually happens in a pattern during sleep. Variant angina rarely causes a heart attack. Which women are more likely to develop heart disease? Your risk for developing heart disease increases with: Menopause . Women can develop heart disease at any age, but your risk increases after your periods stop, usually by age 55. Before menopause, your body makes more estrogen (a female hormone ) which helps protect against heart disease. That's why women generally develop coronary artery disease 10 years later than men. During and after menopause, estrogen levels drop and your risk for heart diseases goes up. If your periods stop before age 40, your risk will be higher than other women your age. Family history of heart disease. Your risk for heart disease may be higher if your: Mother or sister had heart disease before age 65. Father or brother had heart disease before age 55. Problems during pregnancy , such as high blood pressure , gestational diabetes , anemia , and high blood pressure . Use of hormonal birth control (pills, patches, or vaginal rings with estrogen and progesterone). Endometriosis . Polycystic ovary syndrome . Inflammatory and autoimmune diseases . Metabolic syndrome . Mental health issues , such as stress, anxiety , or depression . Health risks from a lack physical activity . Obesity or being overweight. Diabetes . Low HDL cholesterol levels . Mild to moderate high blood pressure . Smoking . If you have one or more risks for heart disease, ask your health care provider for help understanding your risk level. Ask if you need any heart tests to help catch heart disease early. What are the symptoms of heart disease and heart attack in women? When women have symptoms of heart disease , they may include: Pain or discomfort in the chest that may be dull and heavy or sharp Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper belly, or back Nausea or vomiting Unusual fatigue Shortness of breath (feeling like you can't get enough air) during physical activity Women who have coronary artery disease are more likely than men to have chest pain when resting or doing daily activities, rather than during exercise. They're also more likely than men to feel chest pain from mental stress. Symptoms of a heart attack in women may also be different than in men. Chest pain is the most common symptom for both sexes. It may feel like crushing or squeezing. But women are somewhat less likely than men to have chest pain. During a heart attack , women may feel: Pressure or tightness in the chest Pain in the upper back, arms, neck, jaw or throat Dizziness Unusual fatigue Indigestion , heartburn , nausea, or vomiting Stomach pain Shortness of breath Heart attacks usually don't look like the sudden, dramatic events we see in the movies. The symptoms may be mild or strong. They may start slowly. They can stop and then come back. Can heart disease in women be prevented? You can help lower your risk by: Learning how to prevent heart disease and making heart-healthy habits part of your daily life. Asking your provider about your personal risk for heart disease and the best way to manage your heart health. Remember, women can have heart disease without symptoms. But if you pay attention to your risk for heart disease, you can take action to prevent problems or keep them from getting worse. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is heart disease? Heart disease is a general term that includes many types of heart problems. It's also called cardiovascular disease, which means heart and blood vessel disease. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, but there are ways to prevent and manage many types of heart disease. What are the types of heart disease? There are many different types of heart disease. Some you may be born with, called congenital heart disease . Other types develop during your lifetime. Coronary artery disease (also called coronary heart disease) is the most common type of heart disease. It happens slowly over time when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. The plaque narrows or blocks blood flow to the heart muscle and can lead to other heart problems: Angina - chest pain from lack of blood flow Heart attacks - when part of the heart muscle dies from loss of blood flow Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat Other types of heart diseases may affect your heart valves or heart muscle ( cardiomyopathy ). What causes heart diseases? The causes of heart disease depend on the type of disease. Some possible causes include lifestyle, genetics, infections, medicines, and other diseases. Who is more likely to develop heart diseases? There are many different factors that can make you more likely to develop heart disease. Some of these factors you can change, but others you cannot. Age. Your risk of heart disease goes up as you get older. Sex. Some factors may affect heart disease risk differently in women than in men. Family history and genetics. A family history of early heart disease raises your risk of heart disease. And research has shown that some genes are linked to a higher risk of certain heart diseases. Race/ethnicity. Certain groups have higher risks than others. Lifestyle habits. Over time, unhealthy lifestyle habits can raise your risk heart disease: Eating a diet high in saturated fats , refined carbohydrates, and salt . Not getting enough physical activity . Drinking too much alcohol . Smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke . Too much stress . Having other medical conditions can raise your risk of heart diseases. These conditions include: High blood pressure . High cholesterol levels . Diabetes . Obesity . Autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Chronic kidney disease . Metabolic syndrome . What are the symptoms of heart disease? Your symptoms will depend on the type of heart disease you have. You may not have symptoms at first. In some cases, you may not know you have heart disease until you have a complication such as a heart attack. How are heart diseases diagnosed? To find out if you have heart disease, your health care provider will: Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had heart disease Do a physical exam Likely run heart tests and blood tests In some cases, your provider may refer you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for tests, diagnosis, and care. What are the treatments for heart disease? Treatment plans for heart disease depend on the type of heart disease you have, how serious your symptoms are, and what other health conditions you have. Possible treatments may include: Heart-healthy lifestyle changes Medicines Procedures or surgeries Cardiac rehabilitation Can heart diseases be prevented? You may be able to lower your risk of certain heart diseases by making heart-healthy lifestyle changes and managing any other medical conditions you have. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is heart failure? Heart failure means that your heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet your body's needs. Heart failure doesn't mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop beating. But without enough blood flow, your organs may not work well, which can cause serious problems. Heart failure can affect one or both sides of your heart: With right-sided heart failure , your heart is too weak to pump enough blood to your lungs to get oxygen. With left-sided heart failure , your heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood out to your body. This happens when the left side of your heart becomes either: Too weak to pump enough blood. Too thick or stiff to relax and fill with enough blood. Left-sided heart failure is more common than right-sided heart failure. What causes heart failure? Heart failure can start suddenly after a medical condition or injury damages your heart muscle. But in most cases, heart failure develops slowly from long-term medical conditions. Conditions that can cause heart failure include: Arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat) Cardiomyopathy Congenital heart defects or other types of heart diseases that you are born with Coronary artery disease Endocarditis Heart attack Heart valve diseases High blood pressure A blood clot in your lung Diabetes Certain severe lung diseases , such as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) Obesity Over time, left-sided heart failure can lead to right-sided heart failure. Who is more likely to develop heart failure? Heart failure can happen at any age. It happens to both men and women, but men often develop it at a younger age than women.  Your chance of developing heart failure increases if: You're 65 years old or older. Aging can weaken and stiffen your heart muscle. Your family health history includes relatives who have or have had heart failure. You have changes in your genes that affect your heart tissue. You have habits that can harm your heart , including: Smoking Eating foods high in fat , cholesterol , and sodium (salt) Having an inactive lifestyle Alcohol use disorder (AUD) Illegal drug use You have other medical conditions that can affect your heart , including: Any heart or blood vessel conditions, including high blood pressure Serious lung diseases Infection, such as HIV or COVID-19 Obesity Diabetes Sleep apnea Chronic kidney disease Anemia Iron overload disease Cancer treatments that can harm your heart, such as radiation and chemotherapy You are African American. African Americans are more likely to develop heart failure and have more serious cases at younger ages than people of other races. Factors such as stigma, discrimination, income, education, and geographic region can also affect their risk of heart failure. What are the symptoms of heart failure? The symptoms of heart failure depend on which side of your heart is affected and how serious your condition has become.  Most symptoms are caused by reduced blood flow to your organs and fluid buildup in your body. Fluid buildup happens because the flow of blood through your heart is too slow. As a result, blood backs up in the vessels that return the blood to your heart. Fluid may leak from the blood vessels and collect in the tissues of your body, causing swelling ( edema ) and other problems. Symptoms of heart failure may include: Feeling short of breath (like you can't get enough air) when you do things like climbing stairs. This may be one of the first symptoms you notice. Fatigue or weakness even after rest. Coughing . Swelling and weight gain from fluid in your ankles, lower legs, or abdomen (belly). Difficulty sleeping when lying flat. Nausea and loss of appetite. Swelling in the veins of your neck. Needing to urinate (pee) often . At first you may have no symptoms or mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms will usually bother you more. What other problems does heart failure cause? Fluid buildup and reduced blood flow to your organs can lead to serious problems, including: Breathing problems from fluid in and around your lungs (also called congestive heart failure) Kidney or liver damage including cirrhosis Malnutrition if fluid buildup makes eating uncomfortable or if your stomach doesn't get enough blood flow to digest food properly Other heart conditions , such as irregular heartbeat and sudden cardiac arrest Pulmonary hypertension How is heart failure diagnosed? To find out if you have heart failure, your doctor will: Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had heart failure Do a physical exam Will likely order heart tests and blood tests , including a brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) test In some cases, your doctor may refer you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for tests, diagnosis, and care. What are the treatments for heart failure? Your treatment will depend on the type of heart failure you have and how serious it is. There's no cure for heart failure. But treatment can help you live longer with fewer symptoms. Even with treatment, heart failure usually gets worse over time, so you'll likely need treatment for the rest of your life. Most treatment plans include: Taking medicine Eating less sodium and drinking less liquid to control fluid buildup Making other changes, such as quitting smoking , managing stress , and getting as much physical activity as your health care provider recommends Treating any conditions that may make heart failure worse You may need heart surgery if: You have a congenital heart defect or damage to your heart that can be fixed. The left side of your heart is getting weaker and putting a device in your chest could help. Devices include: An implantable cardioverter defibrillator . A biventricular pacemaker (cardiac resynchronization therapy). A mechanical heart pump (a ventricular assist device (VAD) or a total artificial heart). Your heart doctor recommends a heart transplant because your heart failure is life-threatening and nothing else is helping. As part of your treatment, you'll need to pay close attention to your symptoms, because heart failure can worsen suddenly. Your provider may suggest a cardiac rehabilitation program to help you learn how to manage your condition. Can heart failure be prevented? You may be able to prevent or delay heart failure if you: Work with your provider to manage any health conditions that increase your risk of developing heart failure Make healthy changes in your eating, exercise, and other daily habits to help prevent heart disease NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Heart diseases are the number one killer in the United States. They are also a major cause of disability . If you do have heart disease, it is important to find it early, when it is easier to treat. Blood tests and heart health tests can help find heart diseases or identify problems that can lead to heart diseases. There are several different types of heart health tests. Your health care provider will decide which test or tests you need, based on your symptoms (if any), risk factors , and medical history. Cardiac Catheterization Cardiac catheterization is a medical procedure used to diagnose and treat some heart conditions. For the procedure, your provider puts a catheter (a long, thin, flexible tube) into a blood vessel in your arm, groin, or neck, and threads it to your heart. The provider can use the catheter to: Do a coronary angiography. This involves putting a special type of dye in the catheter, so the dye can flow through your bloodstream to your heart. Then your provider takes x-rays of your heart. The dye allows your provider to see your coronary arteries on the x-ray, and to check for coronary artery disease (CAD). CAD is caused by plaque buildup in the arteries . Take samples of your blood and heart muscle. Examine your heart valves . Do procedures such as angioplasty or minor heart surgeries to repair congenital heart defects or replace heart valves. Cardiac CT Scan A cardiac CT ( computed tomography ) scan is a painless imaging test that uses x-rays to take detailed pictures of your heart and its blood vessels. Computers can combine these pictures to create a three-dimensional (3D) model of your whole heart. This test can help providers detect or evaluate various heart problems, including: Coronary artery disease Calcium buildup in the coronary arteries Congenital heart defects Problems with the aorta (the main artery that carries blood away from the heart) Problems with heart function and valves Pericardial diseases Before you have the test, you get an injection of contrast dye. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the pictures. The CT scanner is a large, tunnel-like machine. You lie still on a table that slides you into the scanner, and the scanner takes the pictures. Cardiac MRI Cardiac MRI ( magnetic resonance imaging ) is a painless imaging test that uses radio waves, magnets, and a computer to create detailed pictures of your heart. It can help your provider figure out whether you have heart disease, and if so, how severe it is. A cardiac MRI can also help your provider decide the best way to treat heart problems such as: Congenital heart defects Coronary artery disease Heart valve problems Pericarditis Cardiac tumors Damage from a heart attack The MRI is a large, tunnel-like machine. You lie still on a table that slides you into the MRI machine. The machine makes loud noises as it takes pictures of your heart. Sometimes before the test, you might get an injection of contrast dye. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the pictures. Chest X-Ray A chest x-ray creates pictures of the organs and structures inside your chest, such as your heart, lungs, and blood vessels. It can reveal signs of heart failure , as well as lung disorders and other causes of symptoms not related to heart disease. Coronary Angiography Coronary angiography (angiogram) is a procedure that uses contrast dye and x-ray pictures to look at the insides of your arteries. It can show whether plaque is blocking your arteries and how severe the blockage is. Providers use this procedure to diagnose heart diseases after chest pain , sudden cardiac arrest (SCA), or abnormal results from other heart tests such as an EKG or a stress test. You usually have a cardiac catheterization to inject the dye into your coronary arteries. Then the provider will take special x-rays while the dye is flowing through your coronary arteries. The dye lets your provider study the flow of blood through your heart and blood vessels. Echocardiography Echocardiography, or echo, is a painless test that uses sound waves to create moving pictures of your heart. The pictures show the size and shape of your heart. They also show how well your heart's chambers and valves are working. Providers use an echo to diagnose many different heart problems, and to check how severe they are. There are several different types of echocardiography. For transthoracic echocardiography (the most common type), a technician applies gel to your chest. The gel helps sound waves reach your heart. The technician moves a transducer (wand-like device) across your chest. The transducer connects to a computer. It transmits ultrasound waves into your chest, and the waves bounce (echo) back. The computer converts the echoes into pictures of your heart. Electrocardiogram (EKG), (ECG) An electrocardiogram, also called an ECG or EKG, is a painless test that detects and records your heart's electrical activity. It shows how fast your heart is beating and whether its rhythm is steady or irregular. An EKG may be part of a routine exam to screen for heart disease. Or you may get it to detect and study heart problems such as heart attacks, arrhythmia , and heart failure. For the test, you lie still on a table and a nurse or technician attaches electrodes (patches that have sensors) to the skin on your chest, arms, and legs. Wires connect the electrodes to a machine that records your heart's electrical activity. Stress Testing Stress testing looks at how your heart works during physical stress. It can help to diagnose coronary artery disease, and to check how severe it is. It can also check for other problems, including heart valve disease and heart failure. For the test, you exercise (or are given medicine if you are unable to exercise) to make your heart work hard and beat fast. While this is happening, you get an EKG and blood pressure monitoring. Before or after the test, you might also have an echocardiogram, or other imaging tests such as a nuclear scan . For the nuclear scan, you get an injection of a tracer (a radioactive substance), which travels to your heart. Special cameras detect the energy from the tracer to craeate pictures of your heart. You have pictures taken after you exercise, and then after you rest. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is heart surgery? Heart surgery can correct certain heart problems when other treatments haven't worked or can't be used. In some cases, heart surgery may be a medical emergency. For example, surgery for a severe heart attack may need to be done right away. In other cases, you can plan heart surgery ahead of time. Some heart surgeries are major operations, such as heart bypass surgery for blocked arteries in the heart. Other surgeries are more minor heart procedures, such as putting in a pacemaker. What conditions does heart surgery treat? There are different types of heart surgery that can help treat many heart conditions: What conditions does heart surgery treat? What does the heart surgery do? Coronary artery disease (CAD) - when a sticky substance called plaque narrows or blocks the arteries that supply blood to your heart muscle. Makes a new path for blood to flow around the blocked part of an artery in the heart. This is called a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) , or heart bypass. It's the most common heart surgery in adults. Heart valve diseases - problems with the valves that control the flow of blood through your heart. Repairs heart valves. Replaces heart valves with a mechanical valve or a biologic valve made from pig, cow, or human heart tissue. Arrhythmia - problems with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. They are caused by changes in the electrical signals that control your heartbeat. Places a pacemaker or an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in the chest to correct your heartbeat. Treats atrial fibrillation with small cuts in the heart muscle. The cuts form scars that make a path for the heart's electrical signals (Maze surgery). Heart failure - when your heart is too weak or stiff to pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet your body's needs. Places a device in the chest which may include: An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) to help prevent sudden cardiac arrest . A biventricular pacemaker to coordinate the heart's pumping action so it's more powerful. A ventricular assist device to help the heart pump blood. A total artificial heart to pump blood for the heart. Replaces a seriously diseased heart with a heathy heart ( heart transplantation ). Heart aneurysm - a balloon-like bulge in the wall of an artery. It can be life-threatening if the aneurysm tears or bursts. Repairs or replaces the weak part of a heart artery using a patch or a tube made of fabric. Angina - chest pain from coronary artery disease. Uses a laser to make small channels through part of the heart muscle (transmyocardial laser revascularization). Damaged and abnormal heart structures, including congenital heart defects - heart structure problems that you're born with. Repairs heart damage or problems with how the heart and blood vessels are formed. Repairs depend on the type of defect or damage. What approaches do surgeons use to do heart surgery? The approach a surgeon uses to do heart surgery depends on your heart problem, your general health, and other factors. Approaches to heart surgery include: Open-heart surgery (also called traditional heart surgery) is when the surgeon cuts the chest open to reach the heart. Because it's difficult to operate on a beating heart, medicines are used to stop the heart. A heart-lung bypass machine keeps oxygen-rich blood pumping through the body during the surgery. Off-pump heart surgery is open-heart surgery on a beating heart without using a heart-lung bypass machine. The surgeon holds the heart steady with a device. Surgeons may use off-pump heart surgery to do coronary artery bypass grafts (CABG), but only in certain cases. Minimally invasive heart surgery uses small cuts between the ribs. The cuts may be as small as 2 to 3 inches. The surgeon inserts tools into the chest through the cuts. This type of heart surgery may or may not use a heart-lung bypass machine. Robotic-assisted surgery is a type of minimally invasive surgery. The surgeon uses a computer to control tools on the arms of a robot. This allows the surgeon to be very accurate when doing difficult operations. What are the risks of heart surgery? Like all surgery, heart surgery has risks even though the results are often excellent. The risks include: Bleeding Infection, fever , and swelling A problem from anesthesia (medicine that makes you sleep during surgery) Arrhythmia Damage to the heart, kidneys, liver, and lungs Stroke The risks of heart surgery tend to be higher if: The surgery is an emergency. You have other medical conditions, including: Diabetes Kidney diseases Lung diseases Peripheral artery disease (PAD) NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A heart transplant removes a damaged or diseased heart and replaces it with a healthy one. The healthy heart comes from a donor who has died. It is the last resort for people with heart failure when all other treatments have failed. The heart failure might have been caused by coronary heart disease, damaged heart valves or heart muscles, congenital heart defects, or viral infections of the heart. Although heart transplant surgery is a life-saving measure, it has many risks. Careful monitoring, treatment, and regular medical care can prevent or help manage some of these risks. After the surgery, most heart transplant patients can return to their normal levels of activity. However, fewer than 30% return to work for many different reasons. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What are heart valve diseases? Heart valve disease happens when one or more of your heart valves don't work well. Your heart has four valves: the tricuspid, pulmonary, mitral, and aortic valves. The valves have flaps that open and close. The flaps make sure that blood flows in the right direction through your heart and to the rest of your body. When your heart beats, the flaps open to let blood through. Between heartbeats they close to stop the blood from flowing backwards. If one or more of your heart valves doesn't open or close correctly, it can affect your blood flow and strain your heart. Fortunately, treatment helps most valve diseases. What are the types of heart valve diseases? Heart valves can have three basic kinds of problems: Regurgitation , or backflow, happens when the flaps of a valve don't close tightly. This allows the blood to leak backwards. A common cause of regurgitation is prolapse, where the flaps of the valve flop or bulge back. Prolapse most often affects the mitral valve . Stenosis happens when the flaps of a valve become thick, stiff, or stuck together. This prevents the heart valve from opening all the way. Not enough blood can pass through the valve. Aortic valve stenosis is a common type of stenosis. It affects the valve that controls blood flow into the large artery that carries blood out of the heart to the body. Atresia happens when a heart valve did not form properly and does not have an opening for blood to pass through. Sometimes a valve can have both regurgitation and stenosis. What causes heart valve diseases? Some people are born with heart valve disease. This is called congenital heart valve disease. It can happen alone or along with other congenital heart defects . Heart valve disease can also develop over time as you get older or have certain conditions that affect the heart. Who is more likely to develop heart valve diseases? Your chance of having heart valve disease is higher if: You are older. With age, the heart valves can become thick and stiff. You have or have had other conditions that affect your heart and blood vessels. These include: Rheumatic fever. An untreated strep throat can become rheumatic fever, which can harm the heart valves. The damage may not show up for years. Today, most people take antibiotics to cure strep throat before it can cause heart valve damage. Endocarditis . This is a rare infection in the lining of the heart and heart valves. It is usually caused by bacteria in the bloodstream. A heart attack. Heart failure . Coronary artery disease , especially when it affects the aorta (the large artery that carries blood from the heart to the body). High blood pressure. High blood cholesterol . Diabetes . Obesity and overweight. Lack of physical activity . A family history of early heart disease: A father or brother who had heart disease younger than 55. A mother or sister who had heart disease younger than 65. You were born with an aortic valve that wasn't formed right. Sometimes this will cause problems right away. Other times, the valve may work well enough for years before causing problems. What are the symptoms of heart valve diseases? Many people live their whole lives with a heart valve that doesn't work perfectly and never have any problems. But heart valve disease may get worse slowly over time. You may develop signs and symptoms, such as: Shortness of breath (feeling like you can't get enough air) Fatigue Swelling in your feet, ankles, abdomen (belly), or the veins in your neck Chest pain when you're physically active Arrhythmia , a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat Dizziness or fainting If you don't get treatment for heart valve disease, the symptoms and strain on your heart may keep getting worse. What other problems can heart valve diseases cause? When the valves don't work well, your heart has to pump harder to get enough blood out to the body.  Without treatment, this extra workload on your heart can lead to: Heart failure Stroke Blood clots Sudden cardiac arrest or death How is heart valve disease diagnosed? Your health care provider may listen to your heart with a stethoscope and hear that your heart makes abnormal sounds, such as a click or a heart murmur. These sounds may mean a valve isn't working normally. The provider will usually refer you to a cardiologist, a doctor who specializes in heart diseases. The doctor will also listen to your heart and will do a physical exam. You will also likely need to have one or more heart tests . What are the treatments for heart valve diseases? Most heart valve problems can be treated successfully. Treatment may include: Medicines to control your symptoms and keep your heart pumping well Heart-healthy lifestyle changes to treat other related heart conditions Surgery to repair or replace a valve It's possible that you may need surgery, even if you don't have symptoms. Fixing the valve can help can prevent future heart problems. There are many ways to do heart valve surgery. You and your doctor can decide what's best for you, based on your valve problem and general health. Heart valve repair surgery has fewer risks than heart valve replacement. So, when repair is possible, it's preferred over valve replacement. In some cases, valve replacement is necessary. There are 2 types of replacement valves: Biologic valves made from pig, cow, or human tissue. These valves tend to wear out after 10 to 15 years, but some may last longer. Mechanical (human-made) valves usually don't wear out. But with a mechanical valve, you usually have to take blood thinners for the rest of your life to prevent blood clots. And your risk of endocarditis (a heart infection) is higher than with a biologic valve. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is hemophilia? Hemophilia is a rare bleeding disorder in which the blood does not clot properly. This can lead to problems with bleeding too much after an injury or surgery. You can also have sudden bleeding inside your body, such as in your joints, muscles, and organs. Your blood contains many proteins called clotting factors that can help form clots to stop bleeding. People with hemophilia have low levels of one of these factors, usually either factor VIII (8) or factor IX (9). How severe the hemophilia is depends on the amount of factor in the blood. The lower the amount of the factor, the more likely it is that bleeding could happen and might lead to serious health problems. What are the types of hemophilia? There are several different types of hemophilia. The most common are: Hemophilia A (classic hemophilia), which is caused by a lack or decrease of clotting factor VIII (8) Hemophilia B (Christmas disease), which is caused by a lack or decrease of clotting factor IX (9) What causes hemophilia? Most types of hemophilia are inherited. They are caused by change in one of the genes (also called a mutation) that provides instructions for making the clotting factor proteins. The change may mean that the clotting proteins don't work properly or that they are missing altogether. These genes are on the X chromosome. You may have one or two X chromosomes: People who are born male have one X chromosome (from the mother) and one Y chromosome (from the father). They can get hemophilia if their one X chromosome has the gene change. People who are born female have two X chromosomes, one from the father and one from the mother. They usually only get hemophilia if: Both X chromosomes have the gene change OR One X chromosome has the gene change and the other X chromosome is missing or inactive. People who are born female who have the gene change on one X chromosome are a "carrier" of hemophilia. Sometimes they may have some symptoms of hemophilia. They can pass the gene change on to their children. Hemophilia that is not inherited is called acquired hemophilia. It is rare. It happens when your body makes specialized proteins called autoantibodies that attack and disable a clotting factor. This can happen because of pregnancy, immune system disorders , cancer, or allergic reactions to certain medicines. Sometimes the cause is unknown. Who is at risk for hemophilia? Hemophilia is much more common in people who were born male since they can get it with a change to the gene on one X chromosome. People who have a family history of hemophilia are also at higher risk. What are the symptoms of hemophilia? The signs and symptoms of hemophilia are: Bleeding into the joints. This can cause swelling and pain or tightness in the joints. It often affects the knees, elbows, and ankles. Bleeding into the skin (which is bruising ). Bleeding into the muscle and soft tissue, which can cause a build-up of blood in the area (called a hematoma). Bleeding of the mouth and gums, including bleeding that is hard to stop after you lose a tooth. Bleeding after circumcision . Bleeding after having shots, such as vaccinations . Bleeding in the head of an infant after a difficult delivery. Blood in the urine or stool. Frequent and hard-to-stop nosebleeds. In some cases, severe hemophilia may cause bleeding in the brain. This may cause brain damage and can be life-threatening. How is hemophilia diagnosed? To find out if you have hemophilia, your health care provider will: Ask about your medical history, including your symptoms and other health conditions you may have. Ask about your family history, to find out if you have relatives who have or had hemophilia. Do a physical exam to look for signs of hemophilia, such as bruising. Do certain blood tests to show if your blood is clotting properly. If it does not, then you will have clotting factor tests to diagnose the cause of the bleeding disorder. These blood tests would show the type of hemophilia and the severity. There is genetic testing for the factor VIII (8) and factor IX (9) genes. This testing may be used in people who have a family history of hemophilia to: Identify people who are carriers before they make decisions about pregnancy Test a fetus for hemophilia during pregnancy Test a newborn for hemophilia What are the treatments for hemophilia? The best way to treat hemophilia is to replace the missing clotting factor so that your blood can clot properly. This is usually done by injecting replacement clotting factor into a vein. The replacement clotting factor may be made from donated human blood. Or it may be made in a lab; this kind is called a recombinant clotting factor. Replacement clotting factor can help treat a bleeding episode. In more severe cases of hemophilia, you might get the factor on a regular basis to prevent bleeding. You can learn how to inject the factor so that you can do it yourself at home. There are other medicines to treat hemophilia. They may work by releasing factor VIII (8) from where it is stored in the body tissues, replacing the function of factor VIII (8), or preventing clots from breaking down. If bleeding has damaged your joints, physical therapy may help them function better. Good quality medical care from healthcare professionals who know a lot about the disorder can help prevent some serious problems. Often the best choice for care is to visit a hemophilia treatment center (HTC) . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

A stroke is a medical emergency. There are two types - ischemic and hemorrhagic. Hemorrhagic stroke is the less common type. It happens when a blood vessel breaks and bleeds into the brain. Within minutes, brain cells begin to die. Causes include a bleeding aneurysm , an arteriovenous malformation (AVM), or an artery wall that breaks open. Symptoms of stroke are: Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg (especially on one side of the body) Sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding speech Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination Sudden severe headache with no known cause It is important to treat strokes as quickly as possible. With a hemorrhagic stroke, the first steps are to find the cause of bleeding in the brain and then control it.  Surgery may be needed. Post-stroke rehabilitation can help people overcome disabilities caused by stroke damage. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is blood pressure? Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is called diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually the systolic number comes before or above the diastolic number. For example, 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80. How is high blood pressure diagnosed? High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regular blood pressure checks from your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. They will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis. Blood Pressure Category Systolic Blood Pressure Diastolic Blood Pressure Normal Less than 120 and Less than 80 Elevated 120 - 129 and Less than 80 High Blood Pressure Stage 1 130 - 139 or 80 - 89 High Blood Pressure Stage 2 140 or higher or 90 or higher Hypertensive Crisis (dangerously high blood pressure - seek medical care right away) Higher than 180 and Higher than 120 For children and teens, the health care provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and sex. What are the different types of high blood pressure? There are two main types of high blood pressure: primary and secondary high blood pressure.: Primary, or essential, high blood pressure is the most common type of high blood pressure. For most people who get this kind of blood pressure, it develops over time as you get older. Secondary high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or use of certain medicines. It usually gets better after you treat that condition or stop taking the medicines that are causing it. Why do I need to worry about high blood pressure? When your blood pressure stays high over time, it causes the heart to pump harder and work overtime, possibly leading to serious health problems such as heart attack , stroke , heart failure , and kidney failure . What are the treatments for high blood pressure? Treatments for high blood pressure include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines . You will work with your provider to come up with a treatment plan. It may include only the lifestyle changes. These changes, such as heart-healthy eating and exercise, can be very effective. But sometimes the changes do not control or lower your high blood pressure. Then you may need to take medicine. There are different types of blood pressure medicines. Some people need to take more than one type. If your high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or medicine, treating that condition or stopping the medicine may lower your blood pressure. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Heart disease is the leading cause of the death in the United States. It is also a major cause of disability. But you can take steps to improve your health and help prevent heart disease. The first step is understanding your risk of heart disease. Your risk depends on many factors, some of which are changeable and others that are not. Learning about them and working on the things that you can change can lower your risk of heart disease. What are the heart disease risk factors that I cannot change? There are some risk factors for heart disease that you cannot change: Your age. Your risk of heart disease increases as you get older. The risk is higher in: Men age 45 and older Women age 55 and older Your sex. Some risk factors may affect heart disease risk differently in women than in men. For example: The hormone estrogen provides women some protection against heart disease Diabetes raises the risk of heart disease more in women than in men. Your race or ethnicity. Certain groups have higher risks than others. For example: African Americans are more likely than Whites to die of heart disease, while Hispanic Americans are less likely to die of it Asian Americans as a group have lower rates of heart disease than other groups, but South Asian Americans have higher rates Your family history. You have a greater risk if you have a close family member who had heart disease at an early age, for example if: Your father or brother was diagnosed before age 55 Your mother or sister was diagnosed before age 65 What are the heart disease risk factors I can change and what can I do to lower my risk? There are many heart disease risk factors that you can change.  If you make these changes, you don't just help protect your heart. You can also improve your overall health and well-being. You may have a lot of changes to make. If you need to, you can make the changes gradually, one at a time. What's most important is that you make them. Depending on your lifestyle, these changes could include: Controlling your blood pressure. High blood pressure is a major risk factor for heart disease. It is important to get your blood pressure checked regularly - at least once a year for most adults, and more often if you have high blood pressure. You can also take steps, including lifestyle changes, to prevent or control high blood pressure. Keeping your cholesterol and triglyceride levels under control: High levels of cholesterol can clog your arteries and raise your risk of coronary artery disease and heart attack . Lifestyle changes and medicines (if needed) can lower your cholesterol. Triglycerides are another type of fat in the blood. High  levels of triglyceride may also raise the risk of coronary artery disease, especially in women. Staying at a healthy weight. Being overweight or having obesity can increase your risk of heart disease. This is mostly because they are linked to other heart disease risk factors, including high blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels, high blood pressure, and diabetes. Controlling your weight can lower these risks. Eating a healthy diet. Try to limit saturated fats , foods high in sodium (salt), and added sugars . Instead, eat plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and whole grains. The DASH diet is an example of an eating plan that can help you to lower your blood pressure and cholesterol, two things that can lower your risk of heart disease. Getting regular physical activity. Regular physical activity has many benefits, including strengthening your heart and improving your circulation. It can also help you maintain a healthy weight and lower cholesterol and blood pressure. All of these can lower your risk of heart disease. Limiting alcohol . Drinking too much alcohol can raise your blood pressure. It also adds extra calories, which may cause weight gain. Both of those raise your risk of heart disease. It's best not to drink, but if you do: Have no more than 2 drinks per day if you are a man. Have no more than 1 drink per day if you are a woman. Not smoking . Cigarette smoking raises your blood pressure and puts you at higher risk of heart attack and stroke . If you do not smoke, don't start. If you do smoke, quitting will lower your risk of heart disease. You can talk with your health care provider for help in finding the best way for you to quit. Managing stress. Stress is linked to heart disease in many ways. It can raise your blood pressure. Extreme stress can be a "trigger" for a heart attack. Also, some common ways of coping with stress, such as overeating, heavy drinking, and smoking, are bad for your heart. Some ways to help manage your stress include exercise, listening to music, focusing on something calm or peaceful, and meditating. Managing diabetes. Having diabetes doubles your risk of diabetic heart disease . That is because over time, high blood glucose (blood sugar) from diabetes can damage your blood vessels and the nerves that control your heart and blood vessels. So, it is important to get tested for diabetes , and if you have it, to keep it under control. Getting enough sleep. If you don't get enough sleep, you raise your risk of high blood pressure, obesity, and diabetes. Those three things can raise your risk of heart disease. To improve your sleep: If you are an adult, try to get 7 to 9 hours of sleep per night. Make sure that you have good sleep habits , such as keeping a regular sleep schedule and creating a good sleeping environment in your bedroom. If you have frequent sleep problems , contact your health care provider. One problem, sleep apnea , causes people to briefly stop breathing many times during sleep. This interferes with your ability to get a good rest and can raise your risk of heart disease. If you think you might have sleep apnea, ask your provider about having a sleep study . And if you do have sleep apnea, make sure that you get treatment for it.

Around half of American adults have high blood pressure (hypertension). Many of those people don't know they have it because there are usually no warning signs. This can be dangerous, because high blood pressure can lead to life-threatening conditions like heart attack or stroke . The good news is that you can often prevent or treat high blood pressure. Early diagnosis and heart-healthy lifestyle changes can keep high blood pressure from seriously damaging your health. What is blood pressure? Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into your arteries (the blood vessels that carry blood from your heart to the tissues and organs in your body). Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Blood pressure is measured as two numbers: Systolic pressure (the first and higher number) measures pressure inside your arteries when your heart beats Diastolic pressure (the second and lower number) measures the pressure inside your arteries when your heart rests between beats As an example, a blood pressure reading of 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80. How is high blood pressure diagnosed? High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regular blood pressure checks from your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. They will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis: Blood Pressure Category Systolic Blood Pressure Diastolic Blood Pressure Normal Less than 120 and Less than 80 Elevated 120 - 129 and Less than 80 High Blood Pressure Stage 1 130 - 139 or 80 - 89 High Blood Pressure Stage 2 140 or higher or 90 or higher Hypertensive Crisis (dangerously high blood pressure - seek medical care right away) Higher than 180 and Higher than 120 For children and teens, the provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and gender. Who is more likely to develop high blood pressure? Anyone can develop high blood pressure, but there are certain factors that can increase your risk: Age. Blood pressure tends to rise with age. Race/Ethnicity . High blood pressure is more common in Black adults. They also tend to have higher average blood pressure numbers and get high blood pressure earlier in life. Sex. Men are more likely than women to develop high blood pressure throughout middle age. But in older adults, women are more likely than men to develop high blood pressure. Lifestyle. Certain lifestyle habits can raise your risk for high blood pressure, such as eating too much sodium (salt) or not enough potassium , lack of exercise , drinking too much alcohol , and smoking . Family history and genetics . High blood pressure often runs in families. Many genes are linked to small increases in high blood pressure risk. Social and economic factors: Research shows that factors such as income, education level, where you live, and the type of job you have may raise your risk of high blood pressure. For example, working early or late shifts can raise your risk. Experiencing discrimination and poverty has been linked to high blood pressure. Also, some research has shown that trauma in childhood may raise the risk of high blood pressure. Certain medicines. Some medicines can raise your blood pressure, including: Certain antidepressants Decongestants (medicines to relieve a stuffy nose) Hormonal birth control pills Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which are a type of pain reliever Having certain other medical conditions, such as: Some tumors Chronic kidney disease Diabetes Metabolic syndrome Overweight and obesity Sleep apnea Thyroid problems How can I prevent high blood pressure? You can help prevent high blood pressure by having a healthy lifestyle. This means: Eating a healthy diet. To help manage your blood pressure, you should limit the amount of sodium (salt) that you eat and increase the amount of potassium in your diet. It is also important to eat foods that are lower in fat, as well as plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. The DASH eating plan is an example of an eating plan that can help you to lower your blood pressure. Getting regular physical activity . Regular physical activity can help you maintain a healthy weight and lower your blood pressure. Being at a healthy weight . Being overweight or having obesity increases your risk for high blood pressure. Maintaining a healthy weight can help you control high blood pressure and reduce your risk for other health problems. Limiting alcohol. Drinking too much alcohol can raise your blood pressure. It also adds extra calories, which may cause weight gain. Not smoking. Cigarette smoking raises your blood pressure and puts you at higher risk for heart attack and stroke. If you do not smoke, don't start. If you do smoke, talk to yourprovider for help in finding the best way for you to quit . Managing stress . Learning how to relax and manage stress can improve your emotional and physical health and lower high blood pressure. Stress management techniques include exercising, listening to music, focusing on something calm or peaceful, and meditating. Getting enough high-quality sleep . If you already have high blood pressure, it is important to prevent it from getting worse or causing complications. You need to get regular medical care and follow your treatment plan. Your plan will include healthy lifestyle habit recommendations and possibly medicines . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A stroke is a medical emergency. There are two types - ischemic and hemorrhagic . Ischemic stroke is the more common type. It is usually caused by a blood clot that blocks or plugs a blood vessel in the brain. This keeps blood from flowing to the brain. Within minutes, brain cells begin to die.  Another cause is stenosis, or narrowing of the artery. This can happen because of atherosclerosis , a disease in which plaque builds up inside your arteries. Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) occur when the blood supply to the brain is interrupted briefly. Having a TIA can mean you are at risk for having a more serious stroke. Symptoms of stroke are: Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg (especially on one side of the body) Sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding speech Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination Sudden severe headache with no known cause It is important to treat strokes as quickly as possible. Blood thinners may be used to stop a stroke while it is happening by quickly dissolving the blood clot. Post-stroke rehabilitation can help people overcome disabilities caused by stroke damage. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease is a rare illness that usually affects small children. Other names for the disease are Kawasaki syndrome and mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. It is a type of vasculitis , which is inflammation of the blood vessels. Kawasaki disease is serious, but most children can fully recover if they are treated right away. What causes Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease happens when the immune system injures the blood vessels by mistake. Researchers do not fully know why this happens. But when it does, the blood vessels become inflamed and can narrow or close off. Genetics may play a role in Kawasaki disease. There may also be environmental factors, such as infections. It does not seem to be contagious. This means that it cannot be passed from one child to another. Who is more likely to develop Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease usually affects children under the age of 5. But older children and adults can sometimes get it. It is more common in boys than girls. It can affect children of any race, but those with Asian or Pacific Islander descent are more likely to get it. What are the symptoms of Kawasaki disease? The symptoms of Kawasaki disease may include: High fever lasting at least five days A rash , often on the back, chest, and groin Swollen hands and feet Redness of the lips, lining of the mouth, tongue, palms of the hand, and soles of the feet Pink eye (conjunctivitis) Swollen lymph nodes in the neck Contact your child's health care provider if your child has a fever for 4 days, especially if they have any other symptoms of Kawasaki disease. What other problems can Kawasaki disease cause? Sometimes Kawasaki disease can affect the walls of the coronary arteries. These arteries bring blood and oxygen to your heart. This can lead to: An aneurysm (bulging and thinning of the walls of the arteries). This can raise the risk of blood clots in the arteries. If the blood clots are not treated, they could lead to a heart attack or internal bleeding. Inflammation in the heart. Heart valve problems . Kawasaki disease can also affect other parts of the body, including the brain and nervous system, the immune system, and the digestive system. How is Kawasaki disease diagnosed? There is no specific test for Kawasaki disease. To find out if your child has Kawasaki disease, your child's provider: Will do a physical exam, which includes looking at the signs and symptoms Will likely order blood and urine tests to rule out other diseases and check for signs of inflammation May order tests to check for damage to the heart, such as an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (EKG) What are the treatments for Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease is usually treated in the hospital with an intravenous (IV) dose of immunoglobulin (IVIG) antibodies. Antibodies are proteins that your immune system makes to fight infections. Aspirin may also be part of the treatment. But do not give your child aspirin unless the health care provider tells you to. Aspirin can cause Reye syndrome in children. This is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. Treatment usually works. But if it is not working well enough, the provider may also give your child other medicines to fight the inflammation. If the disease affects your child's heart, they might need additional medicines, surgery, or other medical procedures.

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What are the types of leukemia? There are different types of leukemia. Which type of leukemia you have depends on the type of blood cell that becomes cancer and whether it grows quickly or slowly. The type of blood cell could be: Lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell Myeloid cells, immature cells that become white blood cells, red blood cells, or platelets The different types can grow quickly or slowly: Acute leukemia is fast growing. It usually gets worse quickly if it's not treated. Chronic leukemia is slow growing. It usually gets worse over a longer period of time. The main types of leukemia are: Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) , which is the most common type of cancer in children. It can also affect adults. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) , which is more common in older adults but can also affect children Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) , which is one of the most common types of leukemia in adults. It often occurs during or after middle age. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) , which usually occurs in adults during or after middle age What causes leukemia? Leukemia happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Who is at risk for leukemia? For the specific types, there are different factors which can raise your risk of getting that type. Overall, your risk of leukemia goes up as you age. It is most common over age 60. What are the symptoms of leukemia? Some of the symptoms of leukemia may include: Feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Weight loss or loss of appetite Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Other leukemia symptoms can be different from type to type. Chromic leukemia may not cause symptoms at first. How is leukemia diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose leukemia: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes Once the provider makes a diagnosis, there may be additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture, which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for leukemia? The treatments for leukemia depend on which type you have, how severe the leukemia is, your age, your overall health, and other factors. Some possible treatments might include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells NIH: National Cancer Institute

You've probably heard that high blood pressure is a problem. Sometimes blood pressure that is too low can also cause problems. Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps out blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is the diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually they're written one above or before the other, such as 120/80. If your blood pressure reading is 90/60 or lower, you have low blood pressure. Some people have low blood pressure all the time. They have no symptoms and their low readings are normal for them. In other people, blood pressure drops below normal because of a medical condition or certain medicines. Some people may have symptoms of low blood pressure when standing up too quickly.  Low blood pressure is a problem only if it causes dizziness , fainting or in extreme cases, shock . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Malaria is a serious disease caused by a parasite. You get it when an infected mosquito bites you. Malaria is a major cause of death worldwide, but it is almost wiped out in the United States. The disease is mostly a problem in developing countries with warm climates. If you travel to these countries, you are at risk. There are four different types of malaria caused by four related parasites. The most deadly type occurs in Africa south of the Sahara Desert. Malaria symptoms include chills, flu-like symptoms, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and jaundice. A blood test can diagnose it. It can be life-threatening. However, you can treat malaria with drugs. The type of drug depends on which kind of malaria you have and where you were infected. Malaria can be prevented. When traveling to areas where malaria is found: See your doctor for medicines that protect you Wear insect repellent with DEET Cover up Sleep under mosquito netting Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is the mitral valve? The mitral valve is one of the four valves in your heart. Heart valves have flaps that open and close. The flaps make sure that blood flows in the right direction through your heart and to the rest of your body. When your heart beats, the flaps open to let blood through. Between heartbeats, they close to stop the blood from flowing backwards. The mitral valve opens to let blood flow from your heart's upper left chamber to the lower left chamber. When the lower left chamber contracts (squeezes) to pump blood to your body, the mitral valve closes tightly to keep any blood from flowing backwards. What is mitral valve prolapse (MVP)? Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) happens when the flaps of the mitral valve become floppy and don't close tightly. In some cases, blood may leak backwards through the valve to the chamber it came from. This is called backflow, or regurgitation. When there is a lot of mitral valve backflow, the heart can't push enough blood out to the body. But most people who have MVP don't have any backflow. In fact, MVP doesn't cause any health problems for most people who have it. Who is more likely to develop mitral valve prolapse (MVP)? Anyone can have MVP. Most people who have it were born with it. MVP tends to run in families, but researchers don't know the exact cause. You may be more likely to develop MVP if you: Are older. The risk of MVP increases as aging affects the valve. Had rheumatic fever, a disease that can develop after a strep throat infection and cause damage to the heart valves. Were born with a connective tissue disorder , such as Marfan syndrome or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome . Have Graves' disease , a type of thyroid condition. Have scoliosis (a side-to-side curve of the spine) or other problems with the bones of your body. Have some types of muscular dystrophy . Mitral valve prolapse with backflow is most common in men and people who have high blood pressure . What are the symptoms of mitral valve prolapse (MVP)? Most people who have MVP don't have any symptoms. But if it does cause symptoms, they may include: Heart palpitations (feeling that your heart is fluttering, skipping beats, or beating too hard or too fast) Shortness of breath (feeling like you can't get enough air) A cough Fatigue , dizziness , or anxiety Migraines Chest pain What other problems can mitral valve prolapse (MVP) cause? In rare cases, MVP can cause other problems. They're most often caused by backflow. They can include: Arrhythmia , a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat Endocarditis , an infection in the lining of the heart and heart valves Heart failure How is mitral valve prolapse (MVP) diagnosed? Health care providers often find MVP during routine health check-ups. If you have MVP, your provider may hear a clicking sound when listening to your heart with a stethoscope. If blood flows backwards through the valve, your heart may also make a whooshing sound called a heart murmur. You may also need certain heart tests . The most useful test is an echocardiogram, or echo. This is a type of ultrasound that uses sound waves to make a moving picture of your heart. What are the treatments for mitral valve prolapse (MVP)? Most people don't need any treatment for MVP. If you have symptoms with little or no backflow, you may only need medicine to relieve your discomfort. If the amount of backflow is significant, you may need treatment to prevent other heart problems from developing. Treatments may include: Medicines to help your heart work better. Heart surgery to repair or replace a very abnormal mitral valve with backflow. The goal of surgery is to improve your symptoms and reduce your risk of developing heart failure. When possible, valve repair is generally preferred over replacement. That's because repairs are less likely to weaken the heart muscle, and they're less likely to cause heart infection. Can mitral valve prolapse be prevented? You can't prevent mitral valve prolapse. But if you have mitral valve prolapse, you can help prevent the rare but serious problems it can cause by: Brushing and flossing your teeth regularly . That helps keep bacteria out of your bloodstream, which further reduces the rare risk of a heart infection. Asking your provider if you need to take antibiotics before dental work or surgery to lower your risk of heart infection. This mostly applies to people who have had valve repair or replacement surgery. Getting regular check-ups and taking any medicines that your provider may have prescribed. Making heart-healthy habits part of your life to prevent heart disease . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

An arrhythmia is any disorder of your heart rate or rhythm. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. Most arrhythmias result from problems in the electrical system of the heart. If your arrhythmia is serious, you may need a cardiac pacemaker or an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD).  They are devices that are implanted in your chest or abdomen. A pacemaker helps control abnormal heart rhythms. It uses electrical pulses to prompt the heart to beat at a normal rate. It can speed up a slow heart rhythm, control a fast heart rhythm, and coordinate the chambers of the heart. An ICD monitors heart rhythms. If it senses dangerous rhythms, it delivers shocks. This treatment is called defibrillation. An ICD can help control life-threatening arrhythmias, especially those that can cause sudden cardiac arrest (SCA). Most new ICDs can act as both a pacemaker and a defibrillator. Many ICDs also record the heart's electrical patterns when there is an abnormal heartbeat. This can help the doctor plan future treatment. Getting a pacemaker or ICD requires minor surgery. You usually need to stay in the hospital for a day or two, so your doctor can make sure that the device is working well. You will probably be back to your normal activities within a few days.

The pericardium is a membrane, or sac, that surrounds your heart. It holds the heart in place and helps it work properly.  Problems with the pericardium include: Pericarditis - an inflammation of the sac. It can be from a virus or other infection, a heart attack, heart surgery, other medical conditions, injuries, and certain medicines. Pericardial effusion - the  buildup of fluid in the sac Cardiac tamponade - a serious problem in which buildup of fluid in the sac causes problems with the function of the heart Symptoms of pericardial problems include chest pain, rapid heartbeat, and difficulty breathing. Fever is a common symptom of acute pericarditis. Your doctor may use a physical exam, imaging tests, and heart tests to make a diagnosis. Treatment depends on the cause. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) happens when there is a narrowing of the blood vessels outside of your heart. The cause of PAD is atherosclerosis . This happens when plaque builds up on the walls of the arteries that supply blood to the arms and legs. Plaque is a substance made up of fat and cholesterol. It causes the arteries to narrow or become blocked. This can reduce or stop blood flow, usually to the legs. If severe enough, blocked blood flow can cause tissue death and can sometimes lead to amputation of the foot or leg. The main risk factor for PAD is smoking. Other risk factors include older age and diseases like diabetes, high blood cholesterol, high blood pressure, heart disease, and stroke. Many people who have PAD don't have any symptoms. If you have symptoms, they may include: Pain, numbness, achiness, or heaviness in the leg muscles. This happens when walking or climbing stairs. Weak or absent pulses in the legs or feet Sores or wounds on the toes, feet, or legs that heal slowly, poorly, or not at all A pale or bluish color to the skin A lower temperature in one leg than the other leg Poor nail growth on the toes and decreased hair growth on the legs Erectile dysfunction, especially among men who have diabetes PAD can increase your risk of heart attack , stroke , and transient ischemic attack . Doctors diagnose PAD with a physical exam and heart and imaging tests. Treatments include lifestyle changes, medicines, and sometimes surgery. Lifestyle changes include dietary changes, exercise, and efforts to lower high cholesterol levels and high blood pressure . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Platelets, also known as thrombocytes, are blood cells. They form in your bone marrow, a sponge-like tissue in your bones. Platelets play a major role in blood clotting. Normally, when one of your blood vessels is injured, you start to bleed. Your platelets will clot (clump together) to plug the hole in the blood vessel and stop the bleeding. You can have different problems with your platelets: If your blood has a low number of platelets , it is called thrombocytopenia. This can put you at risk for mild to serious bleeding . The bleeding could be external or internal. There can be various causes. If the problem is mild, you may not need treatment. For more serious cases, you may need medicines or blood or platelet transfusions . If your blood has too many platelets , you may have a higher risk of blood clots . When the cause is unknown, this is called thrombocythemia. It is rare. You may not need treatment if there are no signs or symptoms. In other cases, people who have it may need treatment with medicines or procedures. If another disease or condition is causing the high platelet count, it is thrombocytosis. The treatment and outlook for thrombocytosis depends on what is causing it. Another possible problem is that your platelets do not work as they should . For example, in von Willebrand Disease, your platelets cannot stick together or cannot attach to blood vessel walls. This can cause excessive bleeding. There are different types of in von Willebrand Disease; treatment depends on which type you have. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is Raynaud phenomenon? Raynaud phenomenon is a condition that affects your blood vessels (the tubes that your blood flows through). It causes your blood vessels to narrow, which decreases blood flow. This is called a Raynaud episode or "attack." The attacks usually affect your fingers and toes, causing them to become cold and numb. They may also change color, usually to white or blue. These attacks happen in response to cold temperatures or stress . Raynaud phenomenon may also be called Raynaud disease or Raynaud syndrome. What are the types of Raynaud phenomenon? There are two types of Raynaud phenomenon: Primary Raynaud phenomenon is the more common type. Its cause is unknown. Secondary Raynaud phenomenon is usually caused by another disease or problem, such as lupus or scleroderma . Other causes may be exposure to cold or certain chemicals. The type can be more serious than the primary type. What causes Raynaud phenomenon? Researchers don't know exactly why some people develop Raynaud phenomenon. But they do understand how the attacks happen. When you are exposed to cold, your body tries to slow the loss of heat and maintain its temperature. To do this, the blood vessels in the top layer of your skin constrict (narrow). This moves blood from those vessels near the surface to vessels deeper in the body. But when you have Raynaud phenomenon, the blood vessels in your hands and feet react to cold or stress by narrowing quickly. They also stay narrowed for a long time. Who is more likely to develop Raynaud phenomenon? Anyone can develop Raynaud phenomenon, but some people are more likely to develop it: Primary Raynaud phenomenon has been linked to: Your sex. Women get it more often than men. Your age. It usually develops in people younger than age 30. It often starts in the teenage years. A family history of Raynaud phenomenon. You are more likely to develop Raynaud phenomenon if you have a family member who has it. Secondary Raynaud phenomenon has been linked to: Certain diseases. These include lupus, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), carpal tunnel syndrome , and connective tissue disorders . Certain medicines. Medicines that treat high blood pressure , migraines , and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may cause similar symptoms to Raynaud phenomenon or make your symptoms worse. Work-related exposures, such as repeated use of vibrating machinery (such as a jackhammer), or exposure to cold or certain chemicals. What are the symptoms of Raynaud phenomenon? Raynaud attacks most often happen when you get cold, for example when you grab something cold from the freezer or go into an air-conditioned building on a warm day. Attacks usually affect your fingers and toes. But sometimes they can affect other parts of your body, such as your ears, nose, lips, or nipples. An attack causes the skin to become cold and numb. Your skin may also turn white or blue due to a lack of oxygen. As the blood flow returns, your skin may tingle, throb, or turn red. An attack may last a few minutes or a few hours. If you have darker skin, you may not be able to easily see the skin color changes. For many people, especially those with the primary type, the symptoms are mild. People with the secondary type often have more severe symptoms. They may develop skin ulcers (open sores caused by poor blood flow) or skin infections . How is Raynaud phenomenon diagnosed? There is no specific test to diagnose Raynaud phenomenon. To find out if you have it, your health care provider: Will take your medical history and ask about your symptoms. Will do a physical exam. May order blood and other lab tests to check for other conditions which could be causing your symptoms and/or to help decide which type of Raynaud phenomenon you have. What are the treatments for Raynaud phenomenon? Most people with Raynaud phenomenon can keep their symptoms under control by avoiding getting cold. But if this is not enough, medicines and, in some cases, surgical procedures can help. Secondary Raynaud phenomenon is more likely to be serious and to need more treatments. It's also important to treat the condition or problem that is causing your Raynaud phenomenon. You may need to see a specialist such as a rheumatologist, a doctor who treats diseases of the joints, muscles, and bones. Can Raynaud phenomenon be prevented? Raynaud phenomenon cannot be prevented, but you can help prevent attacks and manage your symptoms by: Placing your hands or feet in a warm place when you have an attack. This could mean putting them under warm (not hot) water or under a heating pad. Keeping your body, especially your hands and feet, warm in cold weather. Avoiding triggers, such as certain medicines and stress. Quitting smoking (or not starting smoking). Managing stress. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

There are four major blood types: A, B, O, and AB. The types are based on substances on the surface of the blood cells. Another blood type is called Rh. Rh factor is a protein on red blood cells.  Most people are Rh-positive; they have Rh factor.  Rh-negative people don't have it.  Rh factor is inherited through genes. When you're pregnant , blood from your baby can cross into your bloodstream, especially during delivery. If you're Rh-negative and your baby is Rh-positive, your body will react to the baby's blood as a foreign substance.  It will create antibodies (proteins) against the baby's blood. These antibodies usually don't cause problems during a first pregnancy. But Rh incompatibility may cause problems in later pregnancies, if the baby is Rh-positive. This is because the antibodies stay in your body once they have formed.  The antibodies can cross the placenta and attack the baby's red blood cells.  The baby could get Rh disease, a serious condition that can cause a serious type of anemia. Blood tests can tell whether you have Rh factor and whether your body has made antibodies. Injections of a medicine called Rh immune globulin can keep your body from making Rh antibodies. It helps prevent the problems of Rh incompatibility.  If treatment is needed for the baby, it can include supplements to help the body to make red blood cells and blood transfusions . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Shock happens when not enough blood and oxygen can get to your organs and tissues.  It causes very low blood pressure and may be life-threatening. It often happens along with a serious injury. There are several kinds of shock. Hypovolemic shock happens when you lose a lot of blood or fluids. Causes include internal or external bleeding, dehydration, burns, and severe vomiting and/or diarrhea. Septic shock is caused by infections in the bloodstream. A severe allergic reaction can cause anaphylactic shock . An insect bite or sting might cause it. Cardiogenic shock happens when the heart cannot pump blood effectively. This may happen after a heart attack. Neurogenic shock is caused by damage to the nervous system. Symptoms of shock include: Confusion or lack of alertness Loss of consciousness Sudden and ongoing rapid heartbeat Sweating Pale skin A weak pulse Rapid breathing Decreased or no urine output Cool hands and feet Shock is a life-threatening medical emergency and it is important to get help right away. Treatment of shock depends on the cause. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is sickle cell disease (SCD)? Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a group of inherited red blood cell disorders. If you have SCD, there is a problem with your hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen throughout the body. With SCD, the hemoglobin forms into stiff rods within the red blood cells. This changes the shape of the red blood cells. The cells are supposed to be disc-shaped, but instead they are crescent, or sickle, shaped. The sickle-shaped cells are not flexible and cannot change shape easily. Many of them burst apart as they move through your blood vessels. The sickle cells usually only last 10 to 20 days, instead of the normal 90 to 120 days. Your body may have trouble making enough new cells to replace the ones that you lost. Because of this, you may not have enough red blood cells. This is a condition called anemia , and it can make you feel tired. The sickle-shaped cells can also stick to vessel walls, causing a blockage that slows or stops the flow of blood. When this happens, oxygen can't reach nearby tissues. The lack of oxygen can cause attacks of sudden, severe pain, called pain crises. These attacks can occur without warning. If you get one, you might need to go to the hospital for treatment. What causes sickle cell disease (SCD)? SCD is caused by a variant (change) in a gene that has instructions for your body to make one part of the hemoglobin. This changed gene is sometimes called a sickle cell gene. People with SCD are born with two sickle cell genes, one from each parent. If you are born with one sickle cell gene, it's called sickle cell trait. People with sickle cell trait are generally healthy, but they can pass the defective gene on to their children. Who is more likely to have sickle cell disease (SCD)? In the United States, most of the people with SCD are African Americans: About 1 in 13 Black or African American babies are born with sickle cell trait About 1 in every 365 Black or African American babies are born with sickle cell disease SCD also affects some people who come from Hispanic, southern European, Middle Eastern, or Asian Indian backgrounds. What are the symptoms of sickle cell disease (SCD)? People with SCD start to have signs of the disease during the first year of life, usually around 5 or 6 months of age. Early symptoms of SCD may include: Painful swelling of the hands and feet Fatigue or fussiness from anemia A yellowish color of the skin ( jaundice ) or the whites of the eyes (icterus) The effects of SCD vary from person to person and can change over time. Most of the signs and symptoms of SCD are related to complications of the disease. They may include severe pain, anemia, organ damage, and infections. How is sickle cell disease (SCD) diagnosed? A blood test can show if you have SCD or sickle cell trait. Genetic tests can tell if you have one or two copies of the sickle cell gene. Genetic tests can help confirm an SCD diagnosis if the results from blood tests are not clear. All states now test newborns for SCD (as well as many other treatable conditions) as part of their screening programs . These programs help find the conditions early, so treatment can be started right away. Health care providers can also diagnose SCD before a baby is born. That test uses a sample of amniotic fluid (the liquid in the sac surrounding the baby) or tissue taken from the placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to the baby). People who are thinking about having children can have the test to find out how likely it is that their children will have SCD. What are the treatments for sickle cell disease (SCD)? There are many ways to manage sickle cell disease. Your medical team will probably include a hematologist, a doctor who specializes in blood diseases. You will work with your medical team to set up a treatment plan. Possible treatment options may include: Treatments that can help relieve symptoms and lessen complications, including: Hydroxyurea, a medicine to reduce sickling of red blood cells. This can help prevent serious symptoms of sickle cell disease. This medicine can be used in adults and in children as young as 9 months old.  But this medicine is not safe during pregnancy. Voxelotor, another medicine to prevent the sickling of red blood cells. It can be used in adults and children ages 4 years and older. Pain relievers for acute or chronic pain. Antibiotics to try to prevent infections in younger children. Blood transfusions for severe anemia. If you have had some serious complications, such as a stroke , you may have transfusions to prevent more complications. Other treatments for specific complications, such as medicines to lower blood pressure and vitamins to treat a vitamin deficiency. Bone marrow or stem cell transplantation, which can cure SCD. Because these transplants are risky and can have serious side effects, they are usually only used in children with severe SCD. For the transplant to work, the bone marrow must be a close match. Usually, the best donor is a brother or sister. Gene therapies to treat SCD in people who are 12 years and older and have had repeated sickle cell crises. These new therapies involve taking some of your blood stem cells and either adding new DNA to them or changing their existing DNA. Then these cells are given back to you, and they can make a type of hemoglobin that is healthy. This can reduce the complications of SCD, including the SCD crises. Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) seems to help some people deal with pain caused by SCD. These types of CAM may lower your pain, especially if it is not well managed with medicines:: Cognitive behavioral therapy (a type of counseling) Acupuncture Exercise or movement programs, such as yoga Massage Meditation and mindfulness practices Virtual reality, a computer-generated 3D environment you can see with special goggles It's also important to take steps to keep yourself as healthy as possible: Get regular medical care Get your routine vaccinations Live a healthy lifestyle Avoid situations that may set off a pain crisis NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is a stroke? A stroke happens when there is a loss of blood flow to part of the brain. Your brain cells cannot get the oxygen and nutrients they need from blood, and they start to die within a few minutes. This can cause lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death. If you think that you or someone else is having a stroke, call 911 right away. Immediate treatment may save someone's life and increase the chances for successful rehabilitation and recovery. What are the types of stroke? There are two types of stroke: Ischemic stroke is caused by a blood clot that blocks or plugs a blood vessel in the brain. This is the most common type; about 80% of strokes are ischemic. Hemorrhagic stroke is caused by a blood vessel that breaks and bleeds into the brain Another condition that's similar to a stroke is a transient ischemic attack (TIA). It's sometimes called a "mini-stroke." TIAs happen when the blood supply to the brain is blocked for a short time. The damage to the brain cells isn't permanent, but if you have had a TIA, you are at a much higher risk of having a stroke. Who is at risk for a stroke? Certain factors can raise your risk of a stroke. The major risk factors include: High blood pressure . This is the primary risk factor for a stroke. Diabetes . Heart diseases . Atrial fibrillation and other heart diseases can cause blood clots that lead to stroke. Smoking . When you smoke, you damage your blood vessels and raise your blood pressure. A personal or family history of stroke or TIA. Age. Your risk of stroke increases as you get older. Race and ethnicity. African Americans have a higher risk of stroke. There are also other factors that are linked to a higher risk of stroke, such as: Alcohol and illegal drug use Not getting enough physical activity High cholesterol Unhealthy diet Having obesity What are the symptoms of stroke? The symptoms of stroke often happen quickly. They include: Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm, or leg (especially on one side of the body) Sudden confusion, trouble speaking, or understanding speech Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes Sudden difficulty walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination Sudden severe headache with no known cause If you think that you or someone else is having a stroke, call 911 right away. How are strokes diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will: Ask about your symptoms and medical history Do a physical exam, including a check of Your mental alertness Your coordination and balance Any numbness or weakness in your face, arms, and legs Any trouble speaking and seeing clearly Run some tests, which may include Diagnostic imaging of the brain, such as a CT scan or MRI Heart tests , which can help detect heart problems or blood clots that may have led to a stroke. Possible tests include an electrocardiogram (EKG) and an echocardiography. What are the treatments for stroke? Treatments for stroke include medicines, surgery, and rehabilitation. Which treatments you get depend on the type of stroke and the stage of treatment. The different stages are: Acute treatment , to try to stop a stroke while it is happening Post-stroke rehabilitation , to overcome the disabilities caused by the stroke Prevention , to prevent a first stroke or, if you have already had one, prevent another stroke Acute treatments for ischemic stroke are usually medicines: You may get tPA, (tissue plasminogen activator), a medicine to dissolve the blood clot. You can only get this medicine within 4 hours of when your symptoms started. The sooner you can get it, the better your chance of recovery. If you cannot get that medicine, you may get medicine that helps stop platelets from clumping together to form blood clots. Or you may get a blood thinner to keep existing clots from getting bigger. If you have carotid artery disease, you may also need a procedure to open your blocked carotid artery Acute treatments for hemorrhagic stroke focus on stopping the bleeding. The first step is to find the cause of bleeding in the brain. The next step is to control it: If high blood pressure is the cause of bleeding, you may be given blood pressure medicines . If an aneurysm if the cause, you may need aneurysm clipping or coil embolization. These are surgeries to prevent further leaking of blood from the aneurysm. It also can help prevent the aneurysm from bursting again. If an arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is the cause of a stroke, you may need an AVM repair. An AVM is a tangle of faulty arteries and veins that can rupture within the brain. An AVM repair may be done through Surgery Injecting a substance into the blood vessels of the AVM to block blood flow Radiation to shrink the blood vessels of the AVM Stroke rehabilitation can help you relearn skills you lost because of the damage. The goal is to help you become as independent as possible and to have the best possible quality of life. Prevention of another stroke is also important, since having a stroke increases the risk of getting another one. Prevention may include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines. Can strokes be prevented? If you have already had a stroke or are at risk of having a stroke, you can make some heart-healthy lifestyle changes to try to prevent a future stroke: Eating a heart-healthy diet Aiming for a healthy weight Managing stress Getting regular physical activity Quitting smoking Managing your blood pressure and cholesterol levels If these changes aren't enough, you may need medicine to control your risk factors. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Thalassemias are inherited blood disorders. If you have one, your body makes fewer healthy red blood cells and less hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a protein that carries oxygen to the body. That leads to anemia . Thalassemias occur most often among people of Italian, Greek, Middle Eastern, Southern Asian, and African descent. Thalassemias can be mild or severe. Some people have no symptoms or mild anemia. The most common severe type in the United States is called Cooley's anemia. It usually appears during the first two years of life. People with it may have severe anemia, slowed growth and delayed puberty, and problems with the spleen, liver, heart, or bones. Doctors diagnose thalassemias using blood tests. Treatments include blood transfusions and treatment to remove excess iron from the body. If you have mild symptoms or no symptoms, you may not need treatment. In some severe cases, you may need a bone marrow transplant. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is a stroke that lasts only a few minutes. It happens when the blood supply to part of the brain is briefly blocked. Symptoms of a TIA are like other stroke symptoms, but do not last as long. They happen suddenly, and include: Numbness or weakness, especially on one side of the body Confusion or trouble speaking or understanding speech Trouble seeing in one or both eyes Difficulty walking Dizziness Loss of balance or coordination Most symptoms of a TIA disappear within an hour, although they may last for up to 24 hours. Because you cannot tell if these symptoms are from a TIA or a stroke, you should go to the hospital right away. TIAs are often a warning sign for future strokes . Taking medicine, such as blood thinners , may reduce your risk of a stroke. Your doctor might also recommend surgery. You can also help lower your risk by having a healthy lifestyle . This includes not smoking, not drinking too much, eating a healthy diet, and exercising. It is also important to control other health problems, such as high blood pressure and cholesterol . NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Varicose veins are swollen, twisted veins that you can see just under the skin. They usually occur in the legs, but also can form in other parts of the body. Hemorrhoids are a type of varicose vein. Your veins have one-way valves that help keep blood flowing toward your heart. If the valves are weak or damaged, blood can back up and pool in your veins. This causes the veins to swell, which can lead to varicose veins. Varicose veins are very common. You are more at risk if you are older, are female, have obesity, don't exercise, or have a family history of varicose veins. They can also be more common in pregnancy. Doctors often diagnose varicose veins from a physical exam. Sometimes you may need additional tests. Exercising, losing weight, elevating your legs when resting, and not crossing them when sitting can help keep varicose veins from getting worse. Wearing loose clothing and avoiding long periods of standing can also help. If varicose veins are painful or you don't like the way they look, your doctor may recommend procedures to remove them. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What are vascular diseases? Your vascular system is your body's network of blood vessels. It includes your: Arteries, which carry oxygen-rich blood from your heart to your tissues and organs Veins, which carry the blood and waste products back to your heart Capillaries, which are tiny blood vessels that connect your small arteries to your small veins. The walls of the capillaries are thin and leaky, to allow for an exchange of materials between your tissues and blood. Vascular diseases are conditions which affect your vascular system. They are common and can be serious. Some types include: Aneurysm - a bulge or "ballooning" in the wall of an artery Atherosclerosis - a disease in which plaque builds up inside your arteries. Plaque is made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, and other substances found in the blood. Blood clots , including deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism Coronary artery disease and carotid artery disease , diseases that involve the narrowing or blockage of an artery. The cause is usually a buildup of plaque. Raynaud phenomenon - a disorder that causes the blood vessels to narrow when you are cold or feeling stressed Stroke - a serious condition that happens when blood flow to your brain stops. Varicose veins - swollen, twisted veins that you can see just under the skin Vasculitis - inflammation of the blood vessels What causes vascular diseases? The causes of vascular diseases depend on the specific disease. These causes include: Genetics Heart diseases such as high cholesterol and high blood pressure Infection Injury Medicines, including hormones Sometimes the cause is unknown. Who is at risk for vascular diseases? The risk factors for vascular diseases can vary, depending on the specific disease. But some of the more common risk factors include: Age - your risk of some diseases goes up as you get older Conditions that can affect the heart and blood vessels, such as diabetes or high cholesterol Family history of vascular or heart diseases Infection or injury that damages your veins Lack of exercise Obesity Pregnancy Sitting or standing still for long periods of time Smoking What are the symptoms of vascular diseases? The symptoms for each disease are different. How are vascular diseases diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may have imaging tests and/or blood tests. How are vascular diseases treated? Which treatment you get depends on which vascular disease you have and how severe it is. Types of treatments for vascular diseases include: Lifestyle changes, such as eating a heart-healthy diet and getting more exercise Medicines, such as blood pressure medicines , blood thinners , cholesterol medicines , and clot-dissolving drugs. In some cases, providers use a catheter to send medicine directly to a blood vessel. Non-surgical procedures, such as angioplasty , stenting, and vein ablation Surgery Can vascular diseases be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent vascular diseases: Make healthy lifestyle changes, such as eating a heart-healthy diet and getting more exercise Don't smoke. If you are already a smoker, talk to your health care provider for help in finding the best way for you to quit . Keep your blood pressure and cholesterol in check If you have diabetes, control your blood sugar Try not to sit or stand for up long periods of time. If you do need to sit all day, get up and move around every hour or so. If you are traveling on a long trip, you can also wear compression stockings and regularly stretch your legs.

Vasculitis is an inflammation of the blood vessels. It happens when the body's immune system attacks the blood vessel by mistake. It can happen because of an infection, a medicine, or another disease. The cause is often unknown. Vasculitis can affect arteries, veins and capillaries. Arteries are vessels that carry blood from the heart to the body's organs. Veins are the vessels that carry blood back to the heart. Capillaries are tiny blood vessels that connect the small arteries and veins. When a blood vessel becomes inflamed, it can: Narrow, making it more difficult for blood to get through. Close off completely so that blood can't get through. Stretch and weaken so much that it bulges.  The bulge is called an aneurysm . If it  bursts, it can cause dangerous bleeding inside the body. Symptoms of vasculitis can vary, but usually include fever, swelling and a general sense of feeling ill. The main goal of treatment is to stop the inflammation. Steroids and other medicines to stop inflammation are often helpful. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Your ankle bone and the ends of your two lower leg bones make up the ankle joint. Your ligaments, which connect bones to one another, stabilize and support it. Your muscles and tendons move it. The most common ankle problems are sprains and fractures (broken bones). A sprain is an injury to the ligaments. It may take a few weeks to many months to heal completely.  A fracture is a break in a bone.  You can also injure other parts of the ankle such as tendons, which join muscles to bone, and cartilage, which cushions your joints. Ankle sprains and fractures are common sports injuries .

Ankylosing spondylitis is a type of arthritis of the spine. It causes inflammation between your vertebrae, which are the bones that make up your spine, and in the joints between your spine and pelvis. In some people, it can affect other joints. AS is more common and more severe in men. It often runs in families. The cause is unknown, but it is likely that both genes and factors in the environment play a role. Early symptoms of AS include back pain and stiffness. These problems often start in late adolescence or early adulthood. Over time, AS can fuse your vertebrae together, limiting movement. Some people have symptoms that come and go. Others have severe, ongoing pain. A diagnosis of AS is based on your medical history and a physical examination. You may also have imaging or blood tests. AS has no cure, but medicines can relieve symptoms and may keep the disease from getting worse. Eating a healthy diet, not smoking, and exercising can also help. In rare cases, you may need surgery to straighten the spine. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease

Of the 206 bones in your body, three of them are in your arm: the humerus, radius, and ulna. Your arms are also made up of muscles, joints, tendons, and other connective tissue. Injuries to any of these parts of the arm can occur during sports, a fall, or an accident. Types of arm injuries include : Tendinitis and bursitis Sprains Dislocations Fractures (broken bones) Nerve problems Osteoarthritis You may also have problems or injure specific parts of your arm, such as your hand , wrist , elbow , or shoulder .

If you feel pain and stiffness in your body or have trouble moving around, you might have arthritis. Most kinds of arthritis cause pain and swelling in your joints. Joints are places where two bones meet, such as your elbow or knee. Over time, a swollen joint can become severely damaged. Some kinds of arthritis can also cause problems in your organs, such as your eyes or skin. Types of arthritis include: Osteoarthritis is the most common type of arthritis. It's often related to aging or to an injury. Autoimmune arthritis happens when your body's immune system attacks healthy cells in your body by mistake. Rheumatoid arthritis is the most common form of this kind of arthritis. Juvenile arthritis is a type of arthritis that happens in  children. Infectious arthritis is an infection that has spread from another part of the body to the joint. Psoriatic arthritis affects people with psoriasis. Gout is a painful type of arthritis that happens when too much uric acid builds up in the body. It often starts in the big toe. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your back is made of bones, muscles, and other tissues extending from your neck to your pelvis. Back injuries can result from sports injuries, work around the house or in the garden, or a sudden jolt such as a car accident. The lower back is the most common site of back injuries and back pain . Common back injuries include : Sprains and strains Herniated disks Fractured (broken) vertebrae These injuries can cause pain and limit your movement. Treatments vary but might include medicines, icing, bed rest, physical therapy, or surgery. You might be able to prevent some back injuries by maintaining a healthy weight, lifting objects with your legs, and using lower-back support when you sit.

If you've ever groaned, "Oh, my aching back!", you are not alone. Back pain is one of the most common medical problems, affecting 8 out of 10 people at some point during their lives. Back pain can range from a dull, constant ache to a sudden, sharp pain. 
Acute back pain comes on suddenly and usually lasts from a few days to a few weeks. Back pain is called chronic if it lasts for more than three months. Most back pain goes away on its own, though it may take awhile. Taking over-the-counter pain relievers and resting can help. However, staying in bed for more than 1 or 2 days can make it worse. If your back pain is severe or doesn't improve after three days, you should call your health care provider.  You should also get medical attention if you have back pain following an injury . Treatment for back pain depends on what kind of pain you have, and what is causing it. It may include hot or cold packs, exercise, medicines, injections, complementary treatments, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Cancer that starts in a bone is uncommon.  Cancer that has spread to the bone from another part of the body is more common. There are three types of bone cancer: Osteosarcoma - occurs most often between ages 10 and 19. It is more common in the knee and upper arm. Chondrosarcoma - starts in cartilage, usually after age 40 Ewing's sarcoma - occurs most often in children and teens under 19. It is more common in boys than girls. The most common symptom of bone cancer is pain. Other symptoms vary, depending on the location and size of the cancer. Surgery is often the main treatment for bone cancer. Other treatments may include amputation, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Because bone cancer can come back after treatment, regular follow-up visits are important. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is bone density? Your bones are made of living tissue. To keep them strong, your body breaks down old bone and replaces it with new bone. But when more bone is broken down than replaced, you lose bone density, also called bone mass. Bone density is a measure of the amount of calcium and other minerals in bone. Bones containing more minerals are denser. They tend to be stronger and less likely to fracture (break). Losing bone density can weaken your bones. In some cases, it can lead to osteoporosis . This is a disease which can make your bones more likely to break. Low bone density that is not low enough to be osteoporosis is sometimes called osteopenia. What can make you lose bone density? Your bones become less dense as you age. Other factors can also make you more likely to lose bone mass, such as: A family history of osteoporosis or low bone mass Not developing good bone mass when you are young Having certain medical conditions, such as: Endocrine diseases Certain digestive diseases Rheumatoid arthritis Certain types of cancer HIV Anorexia nervosa, a type of eating disorder Taking certain medicines, such as: Corticosteroids Proton pump inhibitors (which treat GERD ) Medicines to treat epilepsy Smoking tobacco Long-term heavy alcohol use Physical inactivity or prolonged periods of bedrest Not everyone who has low bone mass gets osteoporosis, but they are at higher risk for developing it. Is there a test to measure your bone health? A bone density scan is the best way to measure your bone health. It compares your bone density, or mass, to that of a healthy person who is the same age and sex as you are. It can show: Whether you have low bone density Whether you have osteoporosis, a disease that makes your bones weak Your risk for breaking bones Whether your osteoporosis treatment is working How can I keep my bones strong? To help keep your bones strong and help prevent osteoporosis, the best thing to do is to eat a healthy diet rich in calcium and vitamin D . Getting regular physical activity , limiting alcohol, and not smoking can also help.  In some cases, your health care provider may prescribe medicines to prevent osteoporosis. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your bones help you move, give you shape and support your body. They are living tissues that rebuild constantly throughout your life. During childhood and your teens, your body adds new bone faster than it removes old bone. After about age 20, you can lose bone faster than you make bone. To have strong bones when you are young, and to prevent bone loss when you are older, you need to get enough calcium , vitamin D , and exercise. You should also avoid smoking and drinking too much alcohol. Bone diseases can make bones easy to break. Different kinds of bone problems include: Low bone density and osteoporosis , which make your bones weak and more likely to break Osteogenesis imperfecta makes your bones brittle Paget's disease of bone makes them weak Bones can also develop cancer and infections Other bone diseases, which are caused by poor nutrition, genetics, or problems with the rate of bone growth or rebuilding NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

A bone graft transplants bone tissue. Surgeons use bone grafts to repair and rebuild diseased bones in your hips, knees, spine, and sometimes other bones and joints. Grafts can also repair bone loss caused by some types of fractures (broken bones) or cancers. Once your body accepts the bone graft, it provides a framework for growth of new, living bone. If the transplanted bone comes from another person , it is called an allograft. Most allograft bone comes from donors who have died. Tissue banks screen these donors and disinfect and test the donated bone to make sure it is safe to use. If the transplanted bone comes from another part of your own body, it is called an autograft. Autograft bone often comes from your ribs, hips or a leg.

Like other parts of the body, bones can get infected. The infections are usually bacterial, but can also be fungal. They may spread to the bone from nearby skin or muscles, or from another part of the body through the bloodstream. People who are at risk for bone infections include those with diabetes , poor circulation, or recent injury to the bone. You may also be at risk if you are having hemodialysis . Symptoms of bone infections include: Pain in the infected area Chills and fever Swelling, warmth, and redness A blood test or imaging test such as an x-ray can tell if you have a bone infection. Treatment includes antibiotics and often surgery.

A bursa is a small, fluid-filled sac that acts as a cushion between a bone and other moving parts, such as muscles, tendons, or skin. Bursitis occurs when a bursa becomes inflamed. People get bursitis by overusing a joint. It can also be caused by an injury. It usually occurs at the knee or elbow. Kneeling or leaning your elbows on a hard surface for a long time can make bursitis start. Doing the same kinds of movements every day or putting stress on joints increases your risk. Symptoms of bursitis include pain and swelling. Your doctor will diagnose bursitis with a physical exam and tests such as x-rays and MRIs. He or she may also take fluid from the swollen area to be sure the problem isn't an infection. Treatment of bursitis includes rest, pain medicines, or ice. If there is no improvement, your doctor may inject a drug into the area around the swollen bursa. If the joint still does not improve after 6 to 12 months, you may need surgery to repair damage and relieve pressure on the bursa. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is calcium and why do I need it? Calcium is a mineral , a nutrient that you need (in small amounts) to keep your body healthy. You have more calcium in your body than any other mineral. Calcium has many important jobs: To build and maintain strong bones. Your body stores almost all of its calcium in your bones and teeth to keep them strong. To help your muscles move. To help your nerves to carry messages between your brain and the rest of your body. To help your blood vessels move blood throughout your body. To help release hormones that affect many functions in your body. Not getting enough calcium can cause several conditions, including: Osteoporosis , a disease which can make your bones weaker and more likely to break. Rickets , a disease in children that causes soft, weak bones. Osteomalacia, a condition which causes soft bones in children and adults. How do I get calcium? You can get calcium from foods and supplements. You may be able to get enough calcium by eating a variety of foods, including: Dairy products such as milk, cheese, and yogurt. These are the main food sources of calcium for most people in the United States. Leafy, green vegetables such as kale, broccoli, and Chinese cabbage (bok choi). Fish with soft bones that you can eat, such as canned sardines and salmon. Calcium-enriched foods such as breakfast cereals, fruit juices, soy and rice drinks, and tofu. The product labels for these foods will show how much calcium they have. Calcium is available in supplements. It is also included in many multivitamins. The two main forms of calcium supplements are calcium carbonate and calcium citrate: Calcium carbonate is absorbed best when taken with food. Some over-the-counter antacids, such as Tums and Rolaids, also contain calcium carbonate. Calcium citrate is absorbed well on an empty stomach or a full stomach. People with low levels of stomach acid absorb calcium citrate more easily than calcium carbonate. Calcium is absorbed best when you take 500 mg or less at one time. If you are taking more than that amount each day, take a smaller dose twice a day rather than taking it all at once. Calcium supplements might cause gas , bloating, and constipation in some people. If you have any of these symptoms, you could try: Spreading out the calcium dose throughout the day Taking it with meals Switching the form of calcium you take How much calcium do I need? The amount of calcium you need each day depends on your age and other factors.  The recommended amounts, in milligrams (mg), are: Birth to 6 months: 200 mg Infants 7-12 months: 260 mg Children 1-3 years: 700 mg Children 4-8 years: 1,000 mg Children 9-13 years: 1,300 mg Teens 14-18 years: 1,300 mg Adults 19-50 years: 1,000 mg Adult men 51-70 years: 1,000 mg Adult women 51-70 years: 1,200 mg Adults 71 years and older: 1,200 mg Pregnant and breastfeeding teens: 1,300 mg Pregnant and breastfeeding adults: 1,000 mg Certain people may have trouble getting enough calcium, including: Children and teens age 4 to 18 years People who are Black or Asian Adults age 50 years and older living in poverty Postmenopausal women; your body absorbs and retains less calcium after menopause People who don't drink milk or eat other dairy products Check with your health care provider to see if you need to take calcium supplements, and if so, how much you should take. Your provider may want to first do a calcium blood test to see if you are getting enough of it. NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

What is carpal tunnel syndrome? Carpal tunnel syndrome is the name for a group of problems that includes numbness, tingling, weakness, or pain in your wrist or hand . It's a very common condition that happens when a nerve in your wrist becomes squeezed. The carpal tunnel is a narrow opening between the bones in your wrist and the ligament that holds them together.  A nerve, called the median nerve, runs from your lower arm through the carpal tunnel and into your hand. This nerve provides feeling to your thumb and first three fingers.  It also helps you move your thumb. Tendons also run from your lower arm, through the carpal tunnel, and into your hand. The tendons connect your finger bones to muscles in your arm, so you can bend your fingers. If the tendons become swollen or irritated inside the carpal tunnel, they may press on the nerve. The squeezed nerve may not work well, which can lead to numbness, weakness, and other symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome. What causes carpal tunnel syndrome? In certain cases, the cause of carpal tunnel syndrome is unknown. But it usually happens from a combination of things that affect the structures in your wrist, such as: Injury to your wrist that causes swelling, such as a sprain or broken bone Health conditions that can affect your nerves , joints , or other parts of your wrist, for example: Diabetes . Rheumatoid arthritis . A cyst or tumor in your wrist. Changes in  certain hormones , which may cause swelling from extra fluid in your body. Examples include an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism), pregnancy and menopause. Problems with the way your wrist is formed. Doing the same wrist and hand movements over and over, such as: Assembly line work. Carpentry or using tools that vibrate. Knitting, gardening, or sports, such as golf. Researchers aren't sure whether long-term typing or computer use leads to carpal tunnel syndrome. Who is more likely to develop carpal tunnel syndrome? Carpal tunnel syndrome usually happens only in adults. You're more likely to develop it if you: Are a woman. Women are three times more likely to have carpal tunnel syndrome than men. Have a health condition that may affect structures in your wrist. Do activities with repeated hand motions. Have had a wrist injury. Have a close relative who has had carpal tunnel syndrome, such as a parent, brother or sister. What are the symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome? You may feel numbness, tingling or burning in your fingers, especially in your thumb, index, and middle fingers. Symptoms often affect both hands. In the early stages, symptoms usually: Start slowly in your dominant hand (the one you write with) Happen at night if you sleep with your wrists bent As symptoms get worse, you may notice: Tingling, pain, or weakness with certain activities, such as driving or holding a phone Difficulty grasping or holding small things Feeling like your fingers are swollen when they're not Without treatment, you could lose feeling in some fingers and have permanent weakness in your thumb. But early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent lasting damage. How is carpal tunnel syndrome diagnosed? To find out if you have carpal tunnel syndrome, your health care provider will: Ask about your medical history Ask about your family health history Do a physical exam Order tests if needed , such as: Lab tests to look for diseases that may damage nerves X-rays to look for broken bones or arthritis Tests to measure the electrical activity in your nerves and muscles Ultrasound to check the nerve in the carpal tunnel What are the treatments for carpal tunnel syndrome? It's easier to treat carpal tunnel syndrome early on, so you should start treatment as soon as possible. Your provider will first treat any health conditions you have that may cause your symptoms. The next step would be treatments for carpal tunnel syndrome. They may include: Wrist splints (usually worn at night). Rest. Medicines to reduce swelling and pain: Over-the-counter pain relievers , such as aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen sodium. Prescription steroids , either pills or an injection (shot) into your wrist. Other therapies (complementary and integrative medicine) . Research shows that yoga may help with pain and weakness. Some people may find acupuncture and chiropractic care helpful, but research hasn't shown that these therapies can improve carpal tunnel syndrome. If you want to try other therapies, talk with your provider first. Surgery to make more space in the carpal tunnel. Surgery may be an option if your symptoms are severe and other treatments don't work. It involves cutting the wrist ligament to take pressure off the nerve.  Recovery may take months. Carpal tunnel syndrome rarely comes back after surgery, but mild symptoms may last. Can carpal tunnel syndrome be prevented? You may help prevent carpal tunnel syndrome if you protect your wrists: Use good posture to keep your wrists in a natural position. Keep your hands warm to keep your muscles flexible. Fingerless gloves may help. Take work breaks and vary your tasks. Stretch and exercise your hands and wrists. Organize your workspace and tools to reduce strain on your hands and wrists.

Cartilage is the tough but flexible tissue that covers the ends of your bones at a joint. It also gives shape and support to other parts of your body, such as your ears, nose and windpipe. Healthy cartilage helps you move by allowing your bones to glide over each other. It also protects bones by preventing them from rubbing against each other. Injured, inflamed, or damaged cartilage can cause symptoms such as pain and limited movement. It can also lead to joint damage and deformity. Causes of cartilage problems include : Tears and injuries, such as sports injuries Genetic factors Other disorders, such as some types of arthritis Osteoarthritis results from breakdown of cartilage. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose can't get into your cells as quickly as usual. The glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. How does diabetes cause foot problems? Foot problems are common in people with diabetes. They can happen over time when high blood sugar damages the nerves and blood vessels in the feet. The nerve damage, called diabetic neuropathy , can cause numbness, tingling, pain, or a loss of feeling in your feet. If you can't feel pain, you may not know when you have a cut, blister , or ulcer (open sore) on your foot. A wound like that could get infected. The infection may not heal well because the damaged blood vessels can cause poor blood flow in your feet. Having an infection and poor blood flow can lead to gangrene . That means the muscle, skin, and other tissues start to die. If you have gangrene or a foot ulcer that does not get better with treatment, you may need an amputation . This is a surgery to cut off your damaged toe, foot, or part of your leg. It may prevent a bad infection from spreading and could save your life. But there's a lot you can do to prevent a foot wound from becoming a major health problem. How can I protect my feet if I have diabetes? The best way to protect your feet is by controlling your blood sugar levels every day. This will help keep nerve and blood vessel damage from getting worse. The next step is to keep the skin of your feet healthy. Good foot care for people with diabetes includes: Checking your feet every day. Look for cuts, redness, and other changes in the skin and toenails, including warts or other spots that your shoes could rub. Make sure to check the bottoms of your feet too. Washing your feet every day. Use warm water and soap. Don't soak your feet because that can dry out your skin. After you dry your feet, you can use talcum powder or cornstarch between your toes. They soak up moisture that can cause infection. If you use lotion, don't apply it between your toes. Asking your doctor how to remove corns and calluses safely. Thick skin on your feet can rub and lead to sores. But removing it the wrong way could damage your skin. So you don't want to cut the skin or use medicated pads or liquid removers. Trimming your toenails straight across with a clipper. If it's hard for you to trim your own toenails, or if they're thick or curve into the skin, have a podiatrist (foot doctor) do it for you. Always wearing well-fitting shoes and socks or slippers to protect your feet when walking. You don't want to walk barefoot, even indoors. And be sure your shoes are smooth inside. A seam or pebble could rub your skin raw. Protecting your feet from heat and cold. Use sunscreen on exposed skin and don't walk barefoot at the beach. In cold weather, wear warm socks instead of warming your feet near a heater or fireplace. Keeping the blood flowing in your feet. Put your feet up when you're sitting. Wiggle your toes and circle your feet throughout the day. Don't wear tight socks. And get plenty of activity that's not too hard on the feet, such as walking. Getting your feet checked at your health care visits. Even if you haven't noticed a problem, it's good to have your health care provider look at your feet. When should I see my health care provider about diabetic foot problems? Serious foot problems can develop quickly. See your health care provider right away if you notice: A cut, blister, or bruise on your feet that doesn't start to heal in a few days Red, warm, or painful skin on your feet A callus with dried blood inside A foot infection that becomes black and smells bad that could be gangrene Remember, controlling your blood sugar and caring for your feet every day are the best steps you can take to prevent serious diabetic foot problems. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is a dislocated shoulder? Your shoulder joint is made up of three bones: your collarbone, your shoulder blade, and your upper arm bone. The top of your upper arm bone is shaped like a ball. This ball fits into a cuplike socket in your shoulder blade. A shoulder dislocation is an injury that happens when the ball pops out of your socket. A dislocation may be partial, where the ball is only partially out of the socket. It can also be a full dislocation, where the ball is completely out of the socket. What causes a dislocated shoulder? Your shoulders are the most movable joints in your body. They are also the most commonly dislocated joints. The most common causes of shoulder dislocations are: Sports injuries Accidents, including traffic accidents Falling on your shoulder or outstretched arm Seizures and electric shocks, which can cause muscle contractions that pull the arm out of place Who is at risk for a dislocated shoulder? A dislocated shoulder can happen to anyone, but they are more common in young men, who are more often involved in sports and other physical activities. Older adults, especially women, are also at higher risk because they are more likely to fall. What are the symptoms of a dislocated shoulder? The symptoms of a dislocated shoulder include: Severe shoulder pain Swelling and bruising of your shoulder or upper arm Numbness and/or weakness in your arm, neck, hand, or fingers Trouble moving your arm Your arm seems to be out of place Muscle spasms in your shoulder If you are having these symptoms, get medical treatment right away. How is a dislocated shoulder diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will take a medical history and examine your shoulder. Your provider may also ask you to get an x-ray to confirm the diagnosis. What are the treatments for a dislocated shoulder? The treatment for dislocated shoulder usually involves three steps: The first step is a closed reduction, a procedure in which your health care provider puts the ball of your upper arm back into the socket. You may first get medicine to relieve the pain and relax your shoulder muscles. Once the joint is back in place, the severe pain should end. The second step is wearing a sling or other device to keep your shoulder in place. You will wear it for a few days to several weeks. The third step is rehabilitation, once the pain and swelling have improved. You will do exercises to improve your range of motion and strengthen your muscles. You may need surgery if you injure the tissues or nerves around the shoulder or if you get repeated dislocations. A dislocation can make your shoulder unstable. When that happens, it takes less force to dislocate it. This means that there is a higher risk of it happening again. Your health care provider may ask you to continue doing some exercises to prevent another dislocation.

Dislocations are joint injuries that force the ends of your bones out of position. The cause is often a fall or a blow, sometimes from playing a contact sport . You can dislocate your ankles, knees, shoulders , hips, elbows and jaw. You can also dislocate your finger and toe joints. Dislocated joints often are swollen, very painful and visibly out of place. You may not be able to move it. A dislocated joint is an emergency.  If you have one, seek medical attention. Treatment depends on which joint you dislocate and the severity of the injury. It might include manipulations to reposition your bones, medicine, a splint or sling, and rehabilitation. When properly repositioned, a joint will usually function and move normally again in a few weeks. Once you dislocate a shoulder or kneecap, you are more likely to dislocate it again. Wearing protective gear during sports may help prevent dislocations.

Your elbow joint is made up of bone, cartilage, ligaments and fluid. Muscles and tendons help the elbow joint move. When any of these structures is hurt or diseased, you have elbow problems. Many things can make your elbow hurt. A common cause is tendinitis , an inflammation or injury to the tendons that attach muscle to bone. Tendinitis of the elbow is a sports injury , often from playing tennis or golf. You may also get tendinitis from overuse of the elbow. Other causes of elbow pain include sprains and strains , fractures (broken bones), dislocations , bursitis , and arthritis . Treatment depends on the cause.

Each step you take involves a complex network of bones, muscles, tendons, and ligaments. This, combined with all of the weight they carry, explains why feet can have problems. To keep your feet healthy: Examine your feet regularly Wear comfortable shoes that fit Wash your feet daily with soap and lukewarm water Trim your toenails straight across and not too short Your foot health can be a clue to your overall health. For example, joint stiffness could mean arthritis. Tingling or numbness could be a sign of diabetes. Swelling might indicate kidney disease, heart disease, or high blood pressure. Good foot care and regular foot checks are an important part of your health care. If you have foot problems, be sure to talk to your doctor. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Each of your feet has 26 bones, 33 joints, and more than 100 tendons, muscles, and ligaments. No wonder a lot of things can go wrong. Here are a few common problems: Bunions - hard, painful bumps on the big toe joint Corns and calluses - thickened skin from friction or pressure Plantar warts - warts on the soles of your feet Fallen arches - also called flat feet Ill-fitting shoes often cause these problems. Aging and being overweight also increase your chances of having foot problems.

What is a fracture? A fracture is a break in a bone. Fractures are usually caused by injuries. Since they can sometimes be serious, it's important to get medical care right away if you think you have a fracture. What are the different types of fractures? There are different ways to describe fractures. For example, there are different types of fractures based on: Whether the bone is partially or completely broken. Whether the bone breaks through the skin; if it does, it's called an open (or compound) fracture. If not, it's a closed fracture. The direction or shape of the break, for example if it's in a line across the bone or if it has some kind of pattern. The cause of the break. For example, a stress fracture is a small break in a bone that is often caused by overuse. Which bone is broken, for example facial fractures include nose and jaw fractures. What causes fractures? Fractures commonly happen because of car accidents, falls , or sports injuries . Overuse and repetitive motions can also cause fractures. Low bone density and osteoporosis are conditions which cause weakening of your bones. Having one of these conditions makes you much more likely to break a bone. What are the symptoms of a fracture? The symptoms of a fracture can vary, depending on which bone you broke. But they may include: Intense pain Deformity, for example a limb that looks out of place Swelling, bruising, or tenderness around the injury Trouble moving the injured part If you think that you may have broken a bone, get medical care right away. How are fractures diagnosed? To find out if you have a fracture, your health provider will do a physical exam and ask about your injury. They will also likely order an x-ray or other imaging test to see if your bone is broken. What are the treatments for fractures? The most common treatment for a fracture is for you to wear a cast or a splint. This will keep your bone from moving while it heals. How long you need to wear it will depend on the type of fracture and which bone is affected. But it's often for several weeks. Your provider will let you when you can get it off. In some cases, you may need surgery to put in plates, pins, or screws to keep the bone in place. Can fractures be prevented? There are steps you can take to lower your risk of fractures: Keeping your bones strong by: Getting enough calcium and vitamin D in your diet Getting regular physical activity , including weight bearing exercises such as walking, tennis, and dancing Getting treatment for low bone density or osteoporosis (if needed) Wearing protective equipment when you do sports Preventing falls by: Getting rid of any tripping hazards in your home Being careful when walking on wet or icy surfaces Choosing the right footwear

Good posture is about more than standing up straight so you can look your best. It is an important part of your long-term health. Making sure that you hold your body the right way, whether you are moving or still, can prevent pain, injuries, and other health problems. What is posture? Posture is how you hold your body. There are two types: Dynamic posture is how you hold yourself when you are moving, like when you are walking, running, or bending over to pick up something. Static posture is how you hold yourself when you are not moving, like when you are sitting, standing, or sleeping. It is important to make sure that you have good dynamic and static posture. The key to good posture is the position of your spine. Your spine has three natural curves - at your neck, mid back, and low back. Correct posture should maintain these curves, but not increase them. Your head should be above your shoulders, and the top of your shoulder should be over the hips. How can posture affect my health? Poor posture can be bad for your health. Slouching or slumping over can: Misalign your musculoskeletal system Wear away at your spine, making it more fragile and prone to injury Cause neck, shoulder, and back pain Decrease your flexibility Affect how well your joints move Affect your balance and increase your risk of falling Make it harder to digest your food Make it harder to breathe How can I improve my posture in general? Be mindful of your posture during everyday activities, like watching television, washing dishes, or walking Stay active. Any kind of exercise may help improve your posture, but certain types of exercises can be especially helpful. They include yoga, tai chi, and other classes that focuses on body awareness. It is also a good idea to do exercises that strengthen your core (muscles around your back, abdomen, and pelvis). Maintain a healthy weight. Extra weight can weaken your abdominal muscles, cause problems for your pelvis and spine, and contribute to low back pain. All of these can hurt your posture. Wear comfortable, low-heeled shoes. High heels, for example, can throw off your balance and force you to walk differently. This puts more stress on your muscles and harms your posture. Make sure work surfaces are at a comfortable height for you, whether you're sitting in front of a computer, making dinner, or eating a meal. How can I improve my posture when sitting? Many Americans spend a lot of their time sitting - either at work, at school, or at home. It is important to sit properly, and to take frequent breaks: Switch sitting positions often Take brief walks around your office or home Gently stretch your muscles every so often to help relieve muscle tension Don't cross your legs; keep your feet on the floor, with your ankles in front of your knees Make sure that your feet touch the floor, or if that's not possible, use a footrest Relax your shoulders; they should not be rounded or pulled backwards Keep your elbows in close to your body. They should be bent between 90 and 120 degrees. Make sure that your back is fully supported. Use a back pillow or other back support if your chair does not have a backrest that can support your lower back's curve. Make sure that your thighs and hips are supported. You should have a well-padded seat, and your thighs and hips should be parallel to the floor. How can I improve my posture when standing? Stand up straight and tall Keep your shoulders back Pull your stomach in Put your weight mostly on the balls of your feet Keep your head level Let your arms hang down naturally at your sides Keep your feet about shoulder-width apart With practice, you can improve your posture; you will look and feel better.

No matter how old you are or what you do for a living, you are always using your hands. 
When there is something wrong with them, you may not be able to do your regular activities. Hand problems include  : Carpal tunnel syndrome - compression of a nerve as it 
goes through the wrist, often making your fingers feel numb Injuries that result in fractures (broken bones), ruptured ligaments 
and dislocations Osteoarthritis - wear-and-tear arthritis, which can 
also cause deformity Tendinitis - irritation of the tendons Disorders and injuries of your fingers and thumb

Heel problems are common and can be painful. Often, they result from too much stress on your heel bone and the tissues that surround it. That stress can come from: Injuries Bruises that you get walking, running or jumping Wearing shoes that don't fit or aren't made well Being overweight These can lead to tendinitis, bursitis, and fasciitis, which are all types of inflammation of the tissues that surround your heel. Over time the stress can cause bone spurs and deformities. Certain diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and gout, can also lead to heel problems. Treatments for heel problems might include rest, medicines, exercises, taping, and special shoes. Surgery is rarely needed.

Your backbone, or spine, is made up of 26 bones called vertebrae. In between them are soft disks filled with a jelly-like substance. These disks cushion the vertebrae and keep them in place. As you age, the disks break down or degenerate. As they do, they lose their cushioning ability. This can lead to pain if the back is stressed. A herniated disk is a disk that ruptures. This allows the jelly-like center of the disk to leak, irritating the nearby nerves. This can cause sciatica or back pain . Your doctor will diagnose a herniated disk with a physical exam and, sometimes, imaging tests. With treatment, most people recover. Treatments include rest, pain and anti-inflammatory medicines, physical therapy, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your hip is the joint where your femur (thigh bone) meets your pelvis (hip bone). There are two main parts: a ball at the end of the femur, which fits in a socket in the pelvis. Your hip is known as a ball-and-socket joint. This is because you have a ball at the end of your femur, and it fits into a socket in your pelvis. This makes your hips very stable and allows for a wide range of motion. When they are healthy, it takes great force to hurt them. However, playing sports, running, overuse, or falling can sometimes lead to hip injuries such as: Strains Bursitis Dislocations Fractures (broken bones) Certain diseases also lead to hip injuries or problems. Osteoarthritis can cause pain 
and limited motion. Osteoporosis of the hip causes weak bones that break easily. Both of 
these are common in older people. Another problem is hip dysplasia, where the ball at the end of the femur is loose in the hip socket. It can cause hip dislocation. Babies who have hip dysplasia are usually born with it, but sometimes they develop it later. Treatment for hip disorders may include rest, medicines, physical therapy, or surgery, including hip replacement .

Hip replacement is surgery for people with severe hip damage. The most common cause of damage is osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis causes pain, swelling, and reduced motion in your joints. It can interfere with your daily activities. If other treatments such as physical therapy, pain medicines, and exercise haven't helped, hip replacement surgery might be an option for you. During a hip replacement operation, the surgeon removes damaged cartilage and bone from your hip joint and replaces them with new, man-made parts. A hip replacement can: Relieve pain Help your hip joint work better Improve walking and other movements The most common problem after surgery is hip dislocation. Because a man-made hip is smaller than the original joint, the ball can come out of its socket. The surgery can also cause blood clots and infections. With a hip replacement, you might need to avoid certain activities, such as jogging and high-impact sports. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases

Most kinds of arthritis cause pain and swelling in your joints. Joints are places where two bones meet, such as your elbow or knee.  Infectious arthritis is an infection in the joint. The infection comes from a bacterial, viral, or fungal infection that spreads from another part of the body.  Symptoms of infectious arthritis include: Intense pain in the joint Joint redness and swelling Chills and fever Inability to move the area with the infected joint One type of infectious arthritis is reactive arthritis. The reaction is to an infection somewhere else in your body. The joint is usually the knee, ankle, or toe.  Sometimes, reactive arthritis is set off by an infection in the bladder, or in the urethra, which carries urine out of the body. In women, an infection in the vagina can cause the reaction. For both men and women, it can start with bacteria passed on during sex. Another form of reactive arthritis starts with eating food or handling something that has bacteria on it. To diagnose infectious arthritis, your health care provider may do tests of your blood, urine, and joint fluid. Treatment includes medicines and sometimes surgery.

Your jaw is a set of bones that holds your teeth. It includes: The maxilla, which is the upper part of your jaw. It holds your top teeth in place and doesn't move. It also supports the muscles involved in chewing and facial expressions. The mandible, which is the lower part of your jaw. You move it when you talk or chew. It also holds your lower teeth in place. The temporomandibular joints (TMJs), which are two joints (one on each side) that connect your mandible to your skull. Jaw problems can include: Fractures (broken bones). Dislocations , which are joint injuries that force the ends of your bones out of position. Temporomandibular disorders (TMDs), which are conditions that affect your TMJs. Osteonecrosis , which happens when the blood flow to part of your bone is disrupted. It can cause the bone to break down. Jaw tumors, which can be benign (not cancer) or cancer. Jaw defects, which are birth defects in which your jaw could be missing or deformed. Diagnostic imaging tests are often used to diagnose jaw injuries and disorders. Your treatment will depend on which jaw problem you have.

What are joints? Your joints are places where two or more bones come together. Your shoulders, elbows, hips, knees, and knuckles are all joints. Your spine has joints, too. But joints are more than bones. They include the soft tissues around them, such as cartilage, tendons and ligaments. Cartilage is the hard slippery flexible tissue that covers the ends of your bones at a joint. Tendons are tough, flexible bands that connect your muscles to your bones so you can move your joints. Ligaments connect the bones of the joint to each other to keep them stable when you move. What are joint disorders? Joint disorders are diseases or injuries that affect your joints. Injuries can happen because of overuse of a joint. Or you could have a sudden injury, such as an accident or a sports injury . What diseases can affect the joints? Many diseases can affect the joints. They often cause joint pain and make your joints stiff, red, or swollen. Most of them are chronic. That means they last a long time. Some may never go away completely. Some of the diseases that affect the joints include: Arthritis . Arthritis may cause joint pain and swelling. There are many types of this disease. Osteoarthritis is the most common type. Over time, arthritis can cause severe joint damage. It can affect people of all ages. A joint injury when you're young may cause osteoarthritis later in life. Lupus . This autoimmune disease affects many parts of the body and can cause joint and muscle pain. Some types of lupus often cause arthritis. Sjgren's Syndrome . This autoimmune disease affects glands that make moisture in many parts of the body. The main symptoms are dry eyes and mouth, but it often causes joint pain, too. Treatments are different depending on the disease. But most treatments include medicines and therapies to relieve pain and other symptoms. What types of joint disorders happen from sudden injuries? Joint disorders from sudden injuries include: Sprains and strains . Sprains are stretched or torn ligaments. Acute strains are stretched or torn muscles or tendons that happen from a sudden injury or movement, such as lifting a heavy object. Dislocated joints . A joint is dislocated when the bones are pushed or pulled out of position. A joint dislocation is a medical emergency. Treatment depends on the type of injury. You can treat many sports injuries at home. But you should call your health care provider if you: Have a lot of joint pain, swelling or numbness Can't put weight on the joint Have pain from an old injury with more swelling, an unstable joint, or a joint that isn't normal in another way What types of joint disorders happen from overuse? Overuse injuries usually damage the soft tissues of the joint. They can happen when you work a joint too hard by doing the same movements over and over. For example, you could get an overuse injury from playing a musical instrument, playing sports, or doing certain jobs, such as carpentry or painting. Joint overuse injuries include: Bursitis . The bursa is a small fluid-filled sac. It works as a pad between the bones of a joint and the moving parts around it, such as muscles, tendons and skin. With bursitis, the bursa becomes irritated and swollen with extra fluid. Overuse is the most common cause, but injuries, infections and other conditions, such as arthritis, can cause bursitis. Tendinitis . This condition happens when you overuse a tendon. It swells and makes the joint painful to move. Chronic strain. A strain becomes chronic when your muscles or tendons stretch or tear slowly over time from repeating the same movements. The treatments for bursitis, tendinitis, and chronic strain are often the same. They usually include rest, keeping the injured joint higher than your heart, and taking medicine to reduce swelling. Your provider may recommend gentle exercise and other treatment. In some cases, your provider may suggest an injection (a shot) of medicine into the joint. If these do not help, you may need surgery. How can I keep my joints healthy? Getting enough physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to prevent or slow joint disorders. Activity strengthens the muscles around your joints and helps them work better. When you play sports, wear the right equipment to protect your joints, such as knee pads. If you already have joint problems, ask your provider what type of activities are best for you. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Juvenile arthritis (JA) is arthritis that happens in children. It causes joint swelling, pain, stiffness, and loss of motion. It can affect any joint, but is more common in the knees, hands, and feet. In some cases it can affect internal organs as well. The most common type of JA that children get is juvenile idiopathic arthritis. There are several other forms of arthritis affecting children. One early sign of JA may be limping in the morning. Symptoms can come and go. Some children have just one or two flare-ups. Others have symptoms that never go away. JA can cause growth problems and eye inflammation in some children. No one knows exactly what causes JA. Most types are autoimmune disorders . This means that your immune system, which normally helps your body fight infection, attacks your body's own tissues. JA can be hard to diagnose. Your health care provider may do a physical exam, lab tests, and x-rays. A team of providers usually treats JA. Medicines and physical therapy can help maintain movement and reduce swelling and pain. They may also help prevent and treat complications. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your knee joint is made up of bone, cartilage, ligaments and fluid. Muscles and tendons help the knee joint move. When any of these structures is hurt or diseased, you have knee problems. Knee problems can cause pain and difficulty walking. Knee problems are very common, and they occur in people of all ages. Knee problems can interfere with many things, from participation in sports to simply getting up from a chair and walking. This can have a big impact on your life. The most common disease affecting the knee is osteoarthritis . The cartilage in the knee gradually wears away, causing pain and swelling. Injuries to ligaments and tendons also cause knee problems. A common injury is to the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). You usually injure your ACL by a sudden twisting motion. ACL and other knee injuries are common sports injuries . Treatment of knee problems depends on the cause. In some cases your doctor may recommend knee replacement . NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is knee replacement surgery? Knee replacement surgery is a surgery to replace parts of your knee joint with new, artificial parts. You may need a knee replacement if you have knee damage that causes severe pain and difficulty doing daily activities, such as walking and climbing stairs. It is usually done when other treatments for knee pain haven't helped enough. The goal of a knee replacement is to relieve pain and help you move better. People of all ages may have knee replacement surgery. But it is more common in older people. The decision whether to have surgery is based on your overall health and how much your knee bothers you. What conditions does knee replacement surgery treat? Knee replacement surgery treats conditions that cause the cartilage of the knee joint to wear away. These include: Knee osteoarthritis . This is the most common reason for knee replacement surgery. It usually develops over time after an injury or with aging. Knee damage from other types of arthritis . Problems from knee joints that aren't formed correctly . What happens during knee replacement surgery? During the surgery, a surgeon removes damaged cartilage and some bone from the surfaces of your knee joint. Cartilage is tissue that covers your bones where they meet. Healthy cartilage is smooth and helps the bones glide over each other when you move. When cartilage becomes rough and wears away, the bones rub against each other, causing pain. After removing the damaged knee cartilage and bone, the surgeon attaches the artificial parts to your bones. The artificial parts are made of metal and plastic. They will give your knee new, smooth surfaces. Knee replacement surgery may replace all the damaged parts of your knee (total knee replacement) or just part of your knee (partial knee replacement). In a total knee replacement, the surgeon replaces 3 surfaces: The end of the shinbone The end of the thighbone The back of the kneecap What happens after knee replacement surgery? Some people go home the same day they have surgery. Other people will stay in the hospital a few days. To help prevent blood clots , you'll most likely take blood thinners and wear special socks or coverings on your legs for a short time after surgery. The success of your surgery depends a lot on what you do at home to help yourself recover. A physical therapist will teach you exercises to make your knee stronger and help it bend. It is important to do these exercises regularly. You may need to use a cane or walker for several weeks after the surgery. It will probably also be several weeks before you can drive. Your doctor will tell you when you can start driving again. Most people who follow their recovery instructions can get back to nearly all of their normal daily activities within 3 to 6 weeks after surgery. What is life like after a knee replacement? After recovering from surgery, most people can move better with less pain than before surgery. But having an artificial knee is not the same as having a normal, healthy knee. You need to protect your new knee by: Staying at a healthy weight . Getting regular physical activity . Not doing any high-impact activities, such as jogging, running, and jumping. Instead, you can try low-impact activities that are good for your knee, such as walking, biking, and swimming What are the risks of knee replacement surgery? The chance of having problems after knee replacement surgery is low. But there are risks after any surgery. Possible problems after knee replacement surgery include: Infection Blood clots Heart attack Stroke Nerve damage Scarring that limits how far you can bend your knee Your age, general health, and how active you are can all affect your risk of having a problem after knee replacement surgery. How long does a knee replacement last? A knee replacement doesn't last forever. After 15 to 20 years, the artificial knee parts may become loose or worn. If that happens, you may need another surgery on the same knee. If you're thinking about having knee replacement surgery, talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits. Together you can decide if a knee replacement is right for you.

Your legs are made up of bones, blood vessels, muscles, and other connective tissue. They are important for motion and standing. Playing sports, running, falling, or having an accident can damage your legs. Common leg injuries include sprains and strains , joint dislocations , and fractures (broken bones). These injuries can affect the entire leg, or just the foot , ankle , knee , or hip . Certain diseases also lead to leg problems. For example, knee osteoarthritis, common in older people, can cause pain and limited motion. Problems in your veins in your legs can lead to varicose veins or deep vein thrombosis .

What are muscle cramps? Muscle cramps are sudden, involuntary contractions or spasms in one or more of your muscles. They are very common and often occur after exercise. Some people get muscle cramps, especially leg cramps, at night. They can be painful, and they may last a few seconds to several minutes. You can have a cramp in any muscle, but they happen most often in the: Thighs Feet Hands Arms Abdomen Area along your ribcage What causes muscle cramps? Causes of muscle cramps include: Straining or overusing a muscle. This is the most common cause. Compression of your nerves, from problems such as a spinal cord injury or a pinched nerve in the neck or back Dehydration Low levels of electrolytes such as magnesium, potassium , or calcium Not enough blood getting to your muscles Pregnancy Certain medicines Getting dialysis Sometimes the cause of muscle cramps is unknown. Who is at risk for muscle cramps? Anyone can get muscle cramps, but they are more common in some people: Older adults People who are overweight Athletes Pregnant women People with certain medical conditions, such as thyroid and nerve disorders When do I need to see a health care provider for muscle cramps? Muscle cramps are usually harmless, and they go away after a few minutes. But you should contact your health care provider if the cramps: Are severe Happen frequently Don't get better with stretching and drinking enough fluids Last a long time Are accompanied by swelling, redness, or a feeling of warmth Are accompanied by muscle weakness What are the treatments for muscle cramps? You usually don't need treatment for muscle cramps. You may be able to find some relief from cramps by: Stretching or gently massaging the muscle Applying heat when the muscle is tight and ice when the muscle is sore Getting more fluids if you are dehydrated If another medical problem is causing the cramps, treating that problem will likely help. There are medicines that providers sometimes prescribe to prevent cramps, but they are not always effective and may cause side effects. Talk to your provider about the risks and benefits of medicines. Can muscle cramps be prevented? To prevent muscle cramps, you can: Stretch your muscles, especially before exercising. If you often get leg cramps at night, stretch your leg muscles before bed. Drink plenty of liquids. If you do intense exercise or exercise in the heat, sports drinks can help you replace electrolytes.

Your muscles help you move and help your body work. Different types of muscles have different jobs. There are many problems that can affect muscles. Muscle disorders can cause weakness, pain or even paralysis. Causes of muscle disorders include: Injury or overuse, such as sprains or strains , cramps or tendinitis A genetic disorder, such as muscular dystrophy Some cancers Inflammation, such as myositis Diseases of nerves that affect muscles Infections Certain medicines Sometimes the cause of muscle disorders is unknown.

What is muscular dystrophy (MD)? Muscular dystrophy (MD) is a group of more than 30 genetic diseases . They cause weakness of the muscles. Over time, the weakness gets worse and can cause trouble walking and doing daily activities. Some types of MD can also affect other organs. What are the types of muscular dystrophy (MD)? There are many different types of MD. Some of the more common types include: Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which is the most common childhood form. It is severe and affects boys more often than girls. The symptoms usually start between ages 3 and 6. Becker muscular dystrophy, which is similar to Duchenne but is less severe and gets worse more slowly. It often starts in the teenage years. Congenital muscular dystrophies, which are present at birth or before age 2. They can be mild or severe. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, which often starts in the teenage years. At first, it affects the muscles of the face, shoulders, and upper arms. Each of the types of MD can be different in many ways, such as: Who is more likely to get them Which muscles they affect When they appear, such as in infancy, childhood, middle age, or later What the symptoms are How serious the symptoms are How quickly they get worse Whether they run in families Whether they affect other organs Even within the same type of MD, people can have different symptoms. What causes muscular dystrophy (MD)? MD is genetic, meaning that it caused by a change in one or more genes. Gene changes are also called gene variants or mutations. The gene changes in MD affect proteins that strengthen and protect muscles. There are different gene changes that cause each type of MD. And sometimes people who have the same type of MD can  have different gene changes. Muscular dystrophy can run in families, or you can be the first in your family to have a muscular dystrophy. How is muscular dystrophy (MD) diagnosed? To find out if you or your child has MD, your health care provider may use: A medical and family history A physical exam Blood and urine tests, including genetic tests and tests for certain enzymes that may be released by damaged muscles Muscle biopsies Electromyography and nerve conduction studies to find out if muscles are responding the right way to nerve signals Heart testing , such as an electrocardiogram (EKG), since some types of MD can cause heart problems Exercise tests to measure muscle strength and breathing and detect any increased rates of certain chemicals following exercise Imaging tests such as an MRI to look at muscle quality and bulk and measure fatty replacement of muscle tissue What are the treatments for muscular dystrophy (MD)? There is no cure for muscular dystrophy. Treatment can help with the symptoms and prevent complications. It usually includes a combination of therapies, such as: Physical therapy to help keep muscles flexible and strong Occupational therapy to relearn lost motor skills and learn ways to work around weakened muscles Respiratory care, such as breathing exercises, oxygen therapy , and ventilators Speech therapy to help with speech and swallowing problems Assistive devices , such as wheelchairs, splints and braces, and walkers Medicines to help delay damage to muscles or minimize the symptoms of MD Surgery to treat some of the conditions associated with MD, such as heart problems, scoliosis , and cataracts NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Myositis means inflammation of the muscles that you use to move your body. An injury, infection, or autoimmune disease can cause it. Two specific kinds are polymyositis and dermatomyositis. Polymyositis causes muscle weakness, usually in the muscles closest to the trunk of your body. Dermatomyositis causes muscle weakness, plus a skin rash. Other symptoms of myositis may include: Fatigue after walking or standing Tripping or falling Trouble swallowing or breathing Doctors may use a physical exam, lab tests, imaging tests and a muscle biopsy to diagnose myositis. There is no cure for these diseases, but you can treat the symptoms. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis are first treated with high doses of a corticosteroid . Other options include medications, physical therapy, exercise, heat therapy, assistive devices, and rest. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Any part of your neck - muscles, bones, joints, tendons, ligaments, or nerves - can cause neck problems. Neck pain is very common. Pain may also come from your shoulder, jaw, head, or upper arms. Muscle strain or tension often causes neck pain. The problem is usually overuse, such as from sitting at a computer for too long.  Sometimes you can strain your neck muscles from sleeping in an awkward position or overdoing it during exercise. Falls or accidents, including car accidents, are another common cause of neck pain.  Whiplash, a soft tissue injury to the neck, is also called neck sprain or strain. Treatment depends on the cause, but may include applying ice, taking pain relievers, getting physical therapy or wearing a cervical collar. You rarely need surgery.

Neuromuscular disorders affect your neuromuscular system. They can cause problems with: The nerves that control your muscles Your muscles Communication between your nerves and muscles These disorders can cause your muscles to become weak and waste away. You may also have symptoms such as spasms, twitching, and pain. Examples of neuromuscular disorders include: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Muscular dystrophy Myasthenia gravis Spinal muscular atrophy There can be different causes for these diseases. Many of them are genetic.This means they are inherited (run in families) or are caused by a new mutation in your genes. Some neuromuscular disorders are autoimmune diseases . Sometimes the cause is unknown. Many neuromuscular diseases have no cure. But treatments may improve symptoms, increase mobility, and lengthen life.

What is osteoarthritis? Osteoarthritis, sometimes called OA, is a type of arthritis that only affects the joints, usually in the hands, knees, hips, neck, and lower back. It's the most common type of arthritis. In a healthy joint, the ends of the bones are covered with a smooth, slippery tissue called cartilage. The cartilage pads the bones and helps them glide easily when you move the joint. With osteoarthritis, the cartilage breaks down and becomes rough. Sometimes, all the cartilage wears away and the bones rub together. Bumps of extra bone called bone spurs may grow in the joint area. There is no cure for osteoarthritis. It usually gets worse slowly. But there's a lot you can do to manage the symptoms. What are the symptoms of osteoarthritis? Osteoarthritis affects people in different ways, and not everyone has pain. The most common symptoms are: Pain when you move, which often gets better with rest Stiffness, especially for the first 30 minutes after you get up from resting Swollen joints, especially after using the joint a lot Less movement in the joint than normal A joint that feels loose or unstable What causes osteoarthritis? Researchers aren't sure what causes osteoarthritis. They think that it could be caused by a combination of factors in the body and the environment. Your chance of developing osteoarthritis increases with age. They also know that some people are more likely to develop it than others. Who is more likely to develop osteoarthritis? Things that make you more likely to develop osteoarthritis include: Aging. Osteoarthritis can happen at any age, but the chance of getting it increases in middle-aged adults and older. After age 50, it is more common in women than in men. Being overweight. Extra weight puts more stress on your joints. Having a past injury or surgery on a joint. This is often the cause of osteoarthritis in younger adults. Doing a lot of activities that overuse the joint. This includes sports with a lot of jumping, twisting, running, or throwing. Having a joint that doesn't line up correctly. A family history of osteoarthritis. Some people inherit genetic changes that increase their chance of developing osteoarthritis. How is osteoarthritis diagnosed? There is no specific test for osteoarthritis. To find out if you have osteoarthritis, your provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history Will do a physical exam May use x-rays or other imaging tests to look at your joints May order lab tests to make sure that a different problem isn't causing your symptoms What are the treatments for osteoarthritis? The goal of treating osteoarthritis is to ease your pain, help you move better, and stop it from getting worse. Treatment usually begins with: Exercises to improve strength, flexibility and balance Weight loss, if needed, to improve pain, especially in your hips or knees Braces or shoe inserts (orthotics) that a health care provider fits for you You can buy some pain relievers and arthritis creams without a prescription. They can be helpful, but it's best to talk to your provider about using them. If they don't help enough, your provider may prescribe injections (shots) into the joint or prescription pain relievers. Complementary therapies may help some people. Massage can increase blood flow and bring warmth to the area. Some research shows that acupuncture may help relieve osteoarthritis pain. Simple things like heat and ice can help, too. If none of these treatments help enough, surgery may be an option. You and your provider can decide if it's right for you. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder in which bones fracture (break) easily. Sometimes the fractures happen for no known reason. OI can also cause weak muscles, brittle teeth, a curved spine, and hearing loss. OI is caused by one of several genes that aren't working properly.  When these genes don't work, it affects how you make collagen, a protein that helps make bones strong. OI can range from mild to severe, and symptoms vary from person to person. A person may have just a few or as many as several hundred fractures in a lifetime. There is no specific test for OI. Your doctor uses your medical and family history, physical exam, and imaging and lab tests to diagnose it. Your doctor may also test your collagen (from skin) or genes (from blood). There is no cure, but you can manage symptoms. Treatments include exercise, pain medicine, physical therapy, wheelchairs, braces, and surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Osteonecrosis is a disease caused by reduced blood flow to bones in the joints. In people with healthy bones, new bone is always replacing old bone. In osteonecrosis, the lack of blood causes the bone to break down faster than the body can make enough new bone. The bone starts to die and may break down. You can have osteonecrosis in one or several bones. It is most common in the upper leg. Other common sites are your upper arm and your knees, shoulders and ankles. The disease can affect men and women of any age, but it usually strikes in your thirties, forties or fifties. At first, you might not have any symptoms. As the disease gets worse, you will probably have joint pain that becomes more severe. You may not be able to bend or move the affected joint very well. No one is sure what causes the disease. Risk factors include : Long-term steroid treatment Alcohol misuse Joint injuries Having certain diseases, including arthritis and cancer Doctors use imaging tests and other tests to diagnose osteonecrosis. Treatments include medicines, using crutches, limiting activities that put weight on the affected joints, electrical stimulation and surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is osteoporosis? Osteoporosis is a disease in which your bones become weak and are likely to fracture (break). The disease can develop when your bone mineral density and bone mass decrease. It can also happen if the structure and strength of your bones change. Osteoporosis is called a "silent" disease because it doesn't usually cause symptoms. You may not even know you have the disease until you break a bone. This could happen with any bone, but it's most common in the bones of your hip, vertebrae in the spine, and wrist. What causes osteoporosis? Your bones are made of living tissue. To keep them strong, your body breaks down old bone and replaces it with new bone. Osteoporosis develops when more bone is broken down than replaced. You lose bone mass and changes happen in the structure of your bone tissue. This can happen as you get older. Other risk factors can also lead to the development of osteoporosis or increase your chance of developing the disease. Who is more likely to develop osteoporosis? Anyone can develop osteoporosis, but you are more likely to develop it if you have one or more of risk factors: Your sex. Osteoporosis is more common in women. Your age. Your risk increases as you get older. It is most common in people over age 50. Your body size. It is more common in people who are slim and thin boned. Your race: White and Asian women are at highest risk. African American and Mexican American women have a lower risk. White men are at higher risk than African American and Mexican American men. Family history. Your risk of osteoporosis may be higher if one of your parents has osteoporosis or broke their hip. Changes to hormones . Low levels of certain hormones can increase your chance of developing osteoporosis. Diet. A diet that is low in calcium and/or vitamin D or does not include enough protein can raise your risk. Long-term use of certain medicines , such as: Corticosteroids Proton pump inhibitors (which treat GERD ) Medicines to treat epilepsy Having other medical conditions , such as: Endocrine diseases Certain digestive diseases Rheumatoid arthritis Certain types of cancer HIV Anorexia nervosa, a type of eating disorder Your lifestyle. Certain lifestyle factors can contribute to bone loss, such as: Smoking tobacco Long-term heavy alcohol use Physical inactivity or prolonged periods of bedrest What are the symptoms of osteoporosis? Osteoporosis usually doesn't cause symptoms. You may not know that you have it until you break a bone. How is osteoporosis diagnosed? Health care providers usually diagnose osteoporosis during routine screening for the disease. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for: Women over age 65 Women of any age who have factors that increase the chance of developing osteoporosis The Task Force does not recommend regular screening for men. To find out if you have osteoporosis, your provider: Will ask about your medical history and whether you have ever broken a bone May do a physical exam, which could include checking for: A loss of height and/or weight Changes in your posture Balance and gait (the way you walk) Your muscle strength Will likely order a bone density scan What are the treatments for osteoporosis? The goals for treating osteoporosis are to slow or stop bone loss and to prevent fractures. Your provider may recommend: A healthy, balanced diet that includes enough calcium, vitamin D, and protein Lifestyle changes such as quitting smoking and limiting alcohol Regular physical activity Fall prevention to help prevent fractures Medicines, such as: Medicines that slow down bone loss Medicines that help rebuild bone In addition to managing your osteoporosis, it's important to avoid activities that may cause a fracture. These can include movements that involve: Twisting your spine, like swinging a golf club Bending forward from the waist, like sit ups and toe touches You can also help reduce the risk of breaking a bone by preventing falls. Can osteoporosis be prevented? To help keep bones strong and help prevent osteoporosis, the best thing to do is to eat a healthy diet rich in calcium and vitamin D. Getting regular physical activity, limiting alcohol, and not smoking can also help. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is Paget's disease of bone? Paget's disease of bone is a chronic bone disorder. Normally, there is a process in which your bones break down and then regrow. In Paget's disease, this process is abnormal. There is excessive breakdown and regrowth of bone. Because the bones regrow too quickly, they are bigger and softer than normal. They may be misshapen and easily fractured (broken). Paget's usually affects just one or a few bones. What causes Paget's disease of bone? Researchers do not know for sure what causes Paget's disease. Environmental factors may play a role. In some cases, the disease runs in families, and several genes have been linked to the disease. Who is at risk for Paget's disease of bone? The disease is more common in older people and those of northern European heritage. If you have a close relative who has Paget's, you are much more likely to have it. What are the symptoms of Paget's disease of bone? Many people do not know that they have Paget's, because it often has no symptoms. When there are symptoms, they are similar to those of arthritis and other disorders. The symptoms include: Pain , which may be due to the disease or to arthritis, which can be a complication of Paget's Headaches and hearing loss , which can happen when Paget's disease affects the skull Pressure on the nerves , which can happen when Paget's disease affects the skull or spine Increased head size, bowing of a limb, or curvature of the spine. This can happen in advanced cases. Hip pain , if Paget's disease affects the pelvis or thighbone Damage to the cartilage of your joints , which may lead to arthritis Usually, Paget's disease gets worse slowly over time. It does not spread to normal bones. What other problems can Paget's disease of bone cause? Paget's disease can lead to other complications, such as: Arthritis, because the misshapen bones can cause increased pressure and more wear and tear on the joints Heart failure . In severe Paget's disease, the heart has to work harder to pump blood to affected bones. Heart failure is more likely if you also have hardening of the arteries . Kidney stones , which can happen when the excessive breakdown of the bone leads to extra calcium in the body Nervous system problems , since the bones can cause pressure on the brain, spinal cord, or nerves. There may also be reduced blood flow to the brain and spinal cord. Osteosarcoma, cancer of the bone Loose teeth, if Paget's disease affects the facial bones Vision loss , if Paget's disease in the skull affects the nerves. This is rare. How is Paget's disease of bone diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam An x-ray of the affected bones. Paget's disease is almost always diagnosed using x-rays. An alkaline phosphatase blood test A bone scan Sometimes the disease is found by accident when one of these tests is done for another reason. What are the treatments for Paget's disease of bone? To avoid complications, it is important to find and treat Paget's disease early. The treatments include: Medicines. There are several different medicines to treat Paget's disease. The most common type is bisphosphonates. They help reduce bone pain and stop or slow down the progress of the disease. Surgery is sometimes needed for certain complications of the disease. There are surgeries to Allow fractures (broken bones) to heal in a better position Replace joints such as the knee and hip when there is severe arthritis Realign a deformed bone to reduce the pain in weight-bearing joints, especially the knees Reduce pressure on a nerve, if enlargement of the skull or spine injuries effects the nervous system Diet and exercise do not treat Paget's, but they can help to keep your skeleton healthy. If you do not have kidney stones, you should make sure to get enough calcium and vitamin D through your diet and supplements. Besides keeping your skeleton healthy, exercise can prevent weight gain and maintain the mobility of your joints. Talk with your health care provider before you start a new exercise program. You need to make sure that the exercise does not put too much stress on the affected bones. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is polio? Polio, or poliomyelitis, is a disease that spreads from person to person. It is caused by the poliovirus. The virus attacks the nervous system. In serious cases, it can cause paralysis (where you can't move parts of the body). The paralysis may be lifelong and can sometimes be life-threatening. Because of vaccines, polio is rare in the United States. But polio does occur in some parts of the world, and travelers can spread the virus. How does polio spread? The poliovirus is very contagious. It spreads through contact with: The stool (poop) of person who has the infection Droplets from a sneeze or cough of someone who has the infection This contact can happen if: You get contaminated stool or droplets on your hands and then touch your mouth A child puts contaminated toys or other objects into their mouth You share food or utensils with someone who has the infection People who have the infection can spread it to others just before and up to several weeks after the symptoms appear. People who don't have symptoms can still spread the virus to others and make them sick. Who is more likely to develop polio? Polio mainly affects children under age 5. But people of any age (including adults) who are unvaccinated are at risk of developing polio. People who live in or travel to areas where there is polio are more likely to get polio. What are the symptoms of polio? Most people who get infected with poliovirus do not have any symptoms. But one out of four people who get polio will have flu-like symptoms. These symptoms usually last 2 to 5 days, and they include: Sore throat Fever Fatigue Nausea Headache Stomach pain In rare cases, polio can be very serious. It can lead to: Meningitis , an infection of the covering of your spinal cord and/or brain. Weakness or paralysis in your arms, legs, or both. This paralysis or weakness can last a lifetime. It is possible for the paralysis to become life-threatening if it affects the muscles that you use to breathe. Post-polio syndrome (PPS), which happens later in life. What is post-polio syndrome (PPS)? Post-polio syndrome (PPS) is a condition that affects polio survivors many years after they recovered from polio. It usually happens 15-40 years later. It is not contagious. People who get PPS start having new weakening in muscles that were previously affected by the polio infection.  Symptoms may range from mild to serious. The symptoms of PPS include: Muscle weakness Muscle atrophy (wasting away of muscles) Loss of muscle function Mental and physical fatigue Joint pain Curving of the spine ( scoliosis ) PPS is rarely life-threatening, but the symptoms can interfere with your daily life. How is polio diagnosed? If you think you or someone in your family has symptoms of polio, call your healthcare provider right away or go to an emergency room. To find out if you or your child has polio, the provider: Will do a physical exam. Will take a detailed medical history, including your vaccination history and history of any recent travel. Will collect samples of body fluids, such as stool, saliva, blood, urine, and spinal fluid. Poliovirus is most likely to be detected in stool specimens. May do an MRI to look at pictures of the spinal cord. What are the treatments for polio and post-polio syndrome (PPS)? There is no cure or specific treatment for polio. For a mild case, getting rest and drinking plenty of liquids may help with some of the symptoms. If the polio is more serious, you or your child may need: Physical or occupational therapy to help with arm or leg weakness. The earlier therapy is started, the better. Pain relievers to help with pain and treat fever. If your child is sick, do not give them aspirin unless their provider tells you to. A ventilator to help with breathing if the breathing muscles are weak or paralyzed. There is no cure for PPS. Treatments may help you manage your symptoms. They include: Non-fatiguing exercises (exercises that do not cause pain or fatigue that lasts more than 10 minutes). These exercises may improve muscle strength and reduce tiredness. Your provider can help you figure out which exercises are best for you. Mobility aids . Ventilation equipment. Lifestyle changes, such as eating a healthy diet, getting enough sleep, and not smoking. Can polio be prevented? There are two types of vaccine that can prevent polio: Inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) given as an injection in the leg or arm, depending on how old you are. Since 2000, this has been the only polio vaccine used in the United States. Oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) is given as drops in the mouth. It is still used throughout much of the world. Children in the United States get four doses of PV as part of their routine childhood immunizations . Most adults in the United States were vaccinated against polio as children. There is a one-time IPV booster. It may be given to adults who have completed their polio vaccinations but are at higher risk of contact with poliovirus. You may be at higher risk if you are: Traveling to a country where the risk of getting polio is greater Working in a laboratory or healthcare setting and handling samples that might contain polioviruses A healthcare worker who has contact with patients who could have polio Another way to help prevent the spread of polio is to wash your hands often with soap and water. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers will not kill poliovirus. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Psoriasis is a skin disease that causes itchy or sore patches of thick, red skin with silvery scales. You usually get them on your elbows, knees, scalp, back, face, palms and feet, but they can show up on other parts of your body. Some people with psoriasis have psoriatic arthritis.  It causes pain, stiffness, and swelling of the joints.  It is often mild, but can sometimes be serious and affect many joints. The joint and skin problems don't always happen at the same time. Your doctor will do a physical exam and imaging tests to diagnose psoriatic arthritis. There is no cure, but medicines can help control inflammation and pain. In rare cases, you might need surgery to repair or replace damaged joints.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a form of arthritis that causes pain, swelling, stiffness and loss of function in your joints. It can affect any joint but is common in the wrist and fingers. More women than men get rheumatoid arthritis. It often starts in middle age and is most common in older people. You might have the disease for only a short time, or symptoms might come and go. The severe form can last a lifetime. Rheumatoid arthritis is different from osteoarthritis , the common arthritis that often comes with older age. RA can affect body parts besides joints, such as your eyes, mouth and lungs. RA is an autoimmune disease , which means the arthritis results from your immune system attacking your body's own tissues. No one knows what causes rheumatoid arthritis. Genes, environment, and hormones might contribute. Treatments include medicine, lifestyle changes, and surgery. These can slow or stop joint damage and reduce pain and swelling. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Rickets causes soft, weak bones in children. It usually occurs when they do not get enough vitamin D , which helps growing bones absorb the minerals calcium and phosphorous. It can also happen when calcium or phosphorus levels are too low. Your child might not get enough vitamin D if he or she: Has dark skin Spends too little time outside Has on sunscreen all the time when out of doors Doesn't eat foods containing vitamin D because of lactose intolerance or a strict vegetarian diet Is breastfed without receiving vitamin D supplements Can't make or use vitamin D because of a medical disorder such as celiac disease In addition to dietary rickets, children can get an inherited form of the disease. Symptoms include bone pain or tenderness, impaired growth, and deformities of the bones and teeth. Your child's doctor uses lab and imaging tests to make the diagnosis. Treatment is replacing the calcium, phosphorus, or vitamin D that are lacking in the diet. Rickets is rare in the United States.

What is a rotator cuff? Your rotator cuff is part of your shoulder joint . It's a group of muscles and tendons that holds the top part of your upper arm bone firmly in your shoulder socket. The rotator cuff keeps your shoulder stable when you move your arm in any direction. What are rotator cuff injuries? Rotator cuff injuries are common. Most of them are wear-and-tear injuries from doing the same arm movements over and over - especially reaching over your head. With time, the tissues in the rotator cuff break down, leading to these injuries: Tendinitis . The tendons in the rotator cuff connect your muscles to your shoulder bones. In tendinitis, the tendons become irritated and swollen from being pinched during shoulder movements. Bursitis . The bursa is a small, fluid-filled sac that pads the space between the rotator cuff and the bones of your shoulder. Bursitis happens when the muscle and bone rub the bursa too much. It swells with extra fluid, which causes pain Rotator cuff tears. Tears in a rotator cuff tendon can happen over time or suddenly from an injury, such as falling on an outstretched arm or lifting something heavy. A tear may go part way through a tendon (partial tear) or all the way through (full tear). Who is more likely to develop a rotator cuff injury? Anyone can develop a rotator cuff injury. But certain people are more likely to have one: People over age 40. Most rotator cuff injuries are from the wear and tear of aging. By age 80, most adults have tears. Athletes. Playing sports with repeated shoulder movements increases the risk of a rotator cuff injury, for example, tennis, swimming, and baseball - especially pitching. People in jobs that require a lot of reaching overhead or heavy lifting. Carpenters, construction workers, and painters are examples of workers who may be more likely to have rotator cuff problems. What are the symptoms of rotator cuff injuries? Rotator cuff injuries don't always cause pain.  But when they do, the pain is often in the top part of your arm or shoulder. You may feel more pain when you: Lie down, especially on the injured shoulder Lift your arm or lower it to the front or side Reach behind your back Other symptoms from a torn rotator cuff may include: Loss of strength in the arm Clicking or popping sounds when you move your arm How are rotator cuff injuries diagnosed? To find out if you have a rotator cuff injury, your health care provider: Will examine your shoulder. This includes checking the range of motion and where the pain is. Will test your arm and shoulder strength. May order imaging tests , such as x-rays , an ultrasound , or an MRI scan . What are the treatments for rotator cuff injuries? The best treatment for you depends on your age, how much your injury bothers you, and whether your injury was sudden or happened from wear and tear. Treatments for rotator cuff injuries often include: Rest Putting ice or a cold pack on the sore area Pain relievers to lessen pain and swelling, such as ibuprofen or aspirin Physical therapy exercises to strengthen your shoulder and improve movement A corticosteroid shot into your shoulder joint if other treatments don't help with the pain Treatments for rotator cuff tendinitis and bursitis may also include ultrasound therapy. Surgery may be an option if your shoulder doesn't feel better in 6 to 12 months. Treatments for a torn rotator cuff may also include heat to the sore area or electrical stimulation of the nerves and muscles (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, TENS). You provider may suggest surgery if your tear is large or is from a recent injury, or symptoms last for 6 to 12 months. When should I see a health care provider for shoulder pain? If certain activities bother your shoulder, it's best to stop doing them and check with your provider. That's because early treatment can prevent mild rotator cuff injuries from becoming more serious later on. If you your arm feels weak right after a sudden injury to your shoulder, see your provider as soon as possible.

Scoliosis causes a sideways curve of your backbone, or spine. These curves are often S- or C-shaped.  Scoliosis is most common in late childhood and the early teens, when children grow fast. Girls are more likely to have it than boys. It can run in families. Symptoms include leaning to one side and having uneven shoulders and hips. Sometimes it is easy to notice, but not always. Children may get screening for scoliosis at school or during a checkup . If it looks like there is a problem, your doctor will use your medical and family history, a physical exam, and imaging tests to make a diagnosis. Treatment depends on your age, how much more you're likely to grow, how much curving there is, and whether the curve is temporary or permanent. People with mild scoliosis might only need checkups to see if the curve is getting worse. Others might need to wear a brace or have surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your shoulder joint is composed of three bones: the clavicle (collarbone), the scapula (shoulder blade), and the humerus (upper arm bone). Your shoulders are the most movable joints in your body. They can also be unstable because the ball of the upper arm is larger than the shoulder socket that holds it. To remain in a stable or normal position, the shoulder must be anchored by muscles, tendons, and ligaments. Because your shoulder can be unstable, it can be easily injured. Common problems include: Sprains and strains Dislocations Separations Tendinitis Bursitis Torn rotator cuffs Frozen shoulder Fractures (broken bones) Arthritis Health care providers diagnose shoulder problems by using your medical history, a physical exam, and imaging tests. Often, the first treatment for shoulder problems is RICE. This stands for Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation. Other treatments include exercise and medicines to reduce pain and swelling. If those don't work, you may need surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your spine, or backbone, protects your spinal cord and allows you to stand and bend. Spinal stenosis causes narrowing in your spine. The narrowing puts pressure on your nerves and spinal cord and can cause pain. Spinal stenosis occurs mostly in people older than 50. Younger people with a spine injury or a narrow spinal canal are also at risk. Diseases such as arthritis and scoliosis can cause spinal stenosis, too. Symptoms might appear gradually or not at all. They include: Pain in your neck or back Numbness, weakness, cramping, or pain in your arms or legs Pain going down the leg Foot problems Doctors diagnose spinal stenosis with a physical exam and imaging tests. Treatments include medications, physical therapy, braces, and surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your backbone, or spine, is made up of 26 bone discs called vertebrae. The vertebrae protect your spinal cord and allow you to stand and bend.  A number of problems can change the structure of the spine or damage the vertebrae and surrounding tissue. They include: Infections Injuries Tumors Conditions, such as ankylosing spondylitis and scoliosis Bone changes that come with age, such as spinal stenosis and herniated disks Spinal diseases often cause pain when bone changes put pressure on the spinal cord or nerves. They can also limit movement. Treatments differ by disease, but sometimes they include back braces and surgery.

A sprain is a stretched or torn ligament. Ligaments are tissues that connect bones at a joint. Falling, twisting, or getting hit can all cause a sprain. Ankle and wrist sprains are common. Symptoms include pain, swelling, bruising, and being unable to move your joint. You might feel a pop or tear when the injury happens. A strain is a stretched or torn muscle or tendon. Tendons are tissues that connect muscle to bone. Twisting or pulling these tissues can cause a strain. Strains can happen suddenly or develop over time. Back and hamstring muscle strains are common. Many people get strains playing sports. Symptoms include pain, muscle spasms, swelling, and trouble moving the muscle. At first, treatment of both sprains and strains usually involves resting the injured area, icing it, wearing a bandage or device that compresses the area, and medicines. Later treatment might include exercise and physical therapy. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

The tailbone is the small bone at the bottom of your backbone, or spine. Tailbone disorders include tailbone injuries, pain, infections, cysts and tumors.  You rarely break your tailbone. Instead, most injuries cause bruises or pulled ligaments. A backward fall onto a hard surface, such as slipping on ice, is the most common cause of such injuries.   Symptoms of various tailbone disorders include pain in the tailbone area, pain upon sitting, pain or numbness in the arms or legs due to pressure on nerves in the tailbone area, and a mass or growth you can see or feel.

Tendons are flexible bands of tissue that connect muscles to bones. They help your muscles move your bones.  Tendinitis is the severe swelling of a tendon. Tendinitis usually happens after repeated injury to an area such as the wrist or ankle. It causes pain and soreness around a joint. Some common forms of tendinitis are named after the sports that increase their risk. They include tennis elbow, golfer's elbow, pitcher's shoulder, swimmer's shoulder, and jumper's knee. Doctors diagnose tendinitis with your medical history, a physical exam, and imaging tests. The first step in treatment is to reduce pain and swelling. Rest, wrapping or elevating the affected area, and medicines can help. Ice is helpful for recent, severe injuries. Other treatments include ultrasound, physical therapy, steroid injections, and surgery.

Fourteen of the 26 bones in your feet are in your toes. The toes, particularly your big toe, help you move and keep your balance.  Playing sports, running, stubbing your toe, and dropping something on your foot can damage your toes. Wearing shoes that are too loose or too tight can also cause toe problems. Certain diseases, such as severe arthritis, can cause toe problems and pain. Gout often causes pain in the big toe. Common toe problems include : Corns and bunions Ingrown toenails Sprains and dislocations Fractures (broken bones) Treatments for toe injuries and disorders vary. They might include shoe inserts or special shoes, padding, taping, medicines, rest, and in severe cases, surgery.

Your wrist connects your hand to your forearm. It is not one big joint; it has several small joints. This makes it flexible and allows you to move your hand in different ways. The wrist has two big forearm bones and eight small bones known as carpals. It also has tendons and ligaments, which are connective tissues. Tendons connect muscles to bones. Ligaments connect bones to each other. What are the types of wrist injuries and disorders? Some of the more common types of wrist injuries and disorders are: Carpal tunnel syndrome , which happens when a nerve that runs from your forearm into your palm becomes squeezed at the wrist Ganglion cysts , which are noncancerous lumps or masses Gout , which is a form of arthritis caused by a buildup of uric acid in your joints Fractures (broken bones) Osteoarthritis , the most common type of arthritis. It is caused by wear and tear of the joints. Sprains and strains , which are injuries to ligaments and injuries to muscles or tendons Tendinitis , inflammation of a tendon, usually due to overuse Who is at risk for wrist injuries and disorders? Certain things can put you at higher risk of having a wrist problem, including: Doing sports, which can put you at risk for injuries and puts stress on your wrist. For example, you may fall on your outstretched hand when you are skating or snowboarding. Your wrist could be injured while doing contact sports. And other sports such as gymnastics and basketball can strain your wrists. Doing repetitive wrist motions, such as typing on a keyboard, working on an assembly line, or using power tools. Having certain diseases. For example, rheumatoid arthritis can cause wrist pain. What are the symptoms of wrist injuries and disorders? The symptoms of a wrist problem can vary, depending on the problem. A common symptom is wrist pain. Some other possible symptoms include swelling, a decrease in wrist strength, and sudden numbness or tingling. How are wrist injuries and disorders diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam, including checking your wrist strength and range of motion An x-ray or other imaging test Blood tests What are the treatments for wrist injuries and disorders? Treatments for wrist pain depends on the type of injury or disorder. They may include: Resting your wrist Wearing a wrist brace or cast Pain relievers Cortisone shots Physical therapy Surgery Can wrist injuries and disorders be prevented? To try to prevent wrist problems, you can: Use wrist guards, when doing sports that put you at risk for wrist injuries In the workplace, perform stretching exercises and take frequent rest breaks. You should also pay attention to ergonomics to make sure that you are using the proper wrist position while working. Make sure that you get enough calcium and vitamin D to keep your bones strong

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia among older people. Dementia is a brain disorder that seriously affects a person's ability to carry out daily activities. AD begins slowly. It first involves the parts of the brain that control thought, memory and language. People with AD may have trouble remembering things that happened recently or names of people they know. A related problem, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), causes more memory problems than normal for people of the same age.  Many, but not all, people with MCI will develop AD. In AD, over time, symptoms get worse. People may not recognize family members. They may have trouble speaking, reading or writing. They may forget how to brush their teeth or comb their hair. Later on, they may become anxious or aggressive, or wander away from home. Eventually, they need total care. This can cause great stress for family members who must care for them. AD usually begins after age 60.  The risk goes up as you get older. Your risk is also higher if a family member has had the disease. No treatment can stop the disease. However, some drugs may help keep symptoms from getting worse for a limited time. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a nervous system disease that attacks nerve cells called neurons in your brain and spinal cord. These neurons transmit messages from your brain and spinal cord to your voluntary muscles - the ones you can control, like in your arms and legs. At first, this causes mild muscle problems. Some people notice: Trouble walking or running Trouble writing Speech problems Eventually, you lose your strength and cannot move. When muscles in your chest fail, you cannot breathe. A breathing machine can help, but most people with ALS die from respiratory failure . The disease usually strikes between age 40 and 60. More men than women get it. No one knows what causes ALS. It can run in families, but usually it strikes at random. There is no cure. Medicines can relieve symptoms and, sometimes, prolong survival. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is aphasia? Aphasia is a language disorder that makes it hard for you to read, write, and say what you mean to say. Sometimes it makes it hard to understand what other people are saying, too. Aphasia is not a disease. It's a symptom of damage to the parts of the brain that control language. The signs of aphasia depend on which part of the brain is damaged. There are four main types of aphasia: Expressive aphasia is when you know what you want to say, but you have trouble saying or writing your thoughts. Receptive aphasia affects your ability to read and understand speech. You can hear what people say or see words on a page, but you have trouble making sense of what they mean. Global aphasia is the loss of almost all language ability. You can't speak, understand speech, read, or write. Anomic or amnesia aphasia is when you have trouble using the right words for certain things, people, places or events. In some cases, aphasia may get better on its own. But it can be a long-term condition. There's no cure, but treatment may help improve language skills. What causes aphasia? Aphasia happens from damage to one or more parts of the brain involved with language. The damage may be from: Stroke , which is the most common cause of aphasia Brain tumor Brain infection or inflammation Brain injury Other brain disorders or neurologic diseases that affect the brain and get worse over time, such as dementia Who is more likely to develop aphasia? Anyone can have aphasia at any age, but most people with aphasia are middle-aged or older. Most aphasia happens suddenly from a stroke or brain injury. Aphasia from a brain tumor or other brain disorder may develop slowly over time. How is aphasia diagnosed? If a health care provider sees signs of aphasia, the provider will usually: Test the person's ability to understand language and speech. This includes asking questions and checking to see if the person can follow simple commands. Order an imaging scan to see if there's a brain injury and what part of the brain is damaged. Possible tests include: MRI CT scan If imaging shows signs of aphasia, more tests may be needed. These tests measure how much the brain damage has affected the ability to talk, read, write, and understand. In most cases, the tests are done by a speech-language pathologist or speech therapist (a specialist who treats speech and communication disorders ). What are the treatments for aphasia? Some people fully recover from aphasia without treatment. But most people should begin speech-language therapy to treat aphasia as soon as possible. Treatment may be one-on-one with a speech therapist or in a group. Therapy using a computer may also be helpful. The specific therapy depends on the type of language loss that a person has. It may include exercises in reading, writing, following directions, and repeating what the therapist says. Therapy may also include learning how to communicate with gestures, pictures, smartphones, or other electronic devices. Family participation may be an important part of speech therapy. Family members can learn to help with recovery in many ways, such as: Using simpler language Including the person with aphasia in conversations Repeating or writing down key words to help communicate more clearly Language abilities may continue to improve over many years. In general, people recover their ability to understand language more fully than their ability to speak. How much a person recovers depends on many things, including: What caused the brain injury What part of the brain was hurt How badly and how much of the brain was hurt The age and health of the person Can aphasia be prevented? You can help prevent aphasia by: Making heart-healthy lifestyle changes to lower your chance of having: A stroke Heart disease Vascular disease (problems with your blood vessels) Protecting your brain from injury: Wearing the right helmet for sports safety , such as when riding a bike Taking action to prevent falls Always wearing your seatbelt and driving safely NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

What are arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are defects in your vascular system .  Your vascular system is your body's network of blood vessels. It includes your: Arteries, which carry oxygen-rich blood from your heart to your tissues and organs. Veins, which carry the blood and waste products back to your heart. Capillaries, which are tiny blood vessels that connect your small arteries to your small veins. An AVM is an abnormal tangle of arteries and veins. They are connected to each other, with no capillaries between them. Without the capillaries, the blood flow from the arteries goes directly into the veins at a faster rate than normal. Because of this, the nearby tissue does not get all the oxygen it would normally get. This lack of oxygen can lead to tissue damage and the death of nerve cells and other cells. The fast rate of blood flow can also increase the blood pressure inside the arteries and veins. This can weaken the arteries and veins. A weakened artery or blood vessel could burst or leak blood. What causes arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? AVMs are rare. The cause of AVMs is unknown. Most of the time, people are born with them. But sometimes they can appear shortly after birth or later in life. What are the symptoms of arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? The symptoms of AVM will depend on where the AVM is located. They can happen anywhere in the body, but they are more common in the brain or spinal cord. Most people with brain or spinal cord AVMs have few, if any, major symptoms. But if a weakened blood vessel bursts, it can spill blood into the brain (called a hemorrhage). Severe hemorrhages can cause a stroke and brain damage. If an AVM is causing symptoms, they can include: Seizures Headache Pain in the area where the AVM is located Vision problems Muscle weakness Problems with movement and speech Confusion Dizziness Loss of consciousness How are arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) diagnosed? To find out if you have an AVM, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history. Will do a physical exam. This may include listening for a bruit. A bruit is whooshing sound caused by the rapid blood flow through the arteries and veins of an AVM. May order imaging tests , such as a CT scan , MRI , ultrasound , or cerebral angiography. For a cerebral angiography, you are injected with a special dye that helps the blood vessels in your brain show up on x-rays . What are the treatments for arteriovenous malformations (AVMs)? Treatments for AVMs will depend on factors such as: Where the AVM is located Its size Your symptoms Your overall health Your risk of bleeding The treatment options may include: Monitoring for any signs that may mean you have an increased risk of hemorrhage. Medicines to help with the symptoms from AVMs. Surgery, which may be done if you have a higher-than-usual risk of bleeding. There are a few different types of surgery for AVMs. In some cases, you may have more than one type. Surgery can be risky, especially when it's done on the brain or spinal cord. So you and your provider will need to discuss the risks and benefits of doing the surgery before you make a decision. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Your autonomic nervous system is the part of your nervous system that controls involuntary actions, such as the beating of your heart and the widening or narrowing of your blood vessels. When something goes wrong in this system, it can cause serious problems, including: Blood pressure problems Heart problems Trouble with breathing and swallowing Erectile dysfunction in men Autonomic nervous system disorders can occur alone or as the result of another disease, such as Parkinson's disease , alcoholism and diabetes. Problems can affect either part of the system, as in complex regional pain syndromes , or all of the system. Some types are temporary, but many worsen over time. When they affect your breathing or heart function, these disorders can be life-threatening. Some autonomic nervous system disorders get better when an underlying disease is treated. Often, however, there is no cure. In that case, the goal of treatment is to improve symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Bell's palsy is the most common cause of facial paralysis. It usually affects just one side of the face. Symptoms appear suddenly and are at their worst about 48 hours after they start. They can range from mild to severe and include: Twitching Weakness Paralysis Drooping eyelid or corner of mouth Drooling Dry eye or mouth Excessive tearing in the eye Impaired ability to taste Scientists think that a viral infection makes the facial nerve swell or become inflamed.  You are most likely to get Bell's palsy if you are pregnant, diabetic or sick with a cold or flu. Three out of four patients improve without treatment.  With or without treatment, most people begin to get better within 2 weeks and recover completely within 3 to 6 months. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

The brachial plexus is a network of nerves that sends signals from the spine to the shoulder, arm, and hand. Damage to the brachial plexus can cause symptoms such as: A limp or paralyzed arm Lack of muscle control in the arm, hand, or wrist Lack of feeling or sensation in the arm or hand Brachial plexus injuries can happen because of shoulder trauma, tumors, or inflammation. Sometimes they happen during childbirth when a baby's shoulders become stuck during delivery and the nerves stretch or tear. Some brachial plexus injuries may heal without treatment. Many children who are injured during birth improve or recover by 3 to 4 months of age. Treatment includes physical therapy and, in some cases, surgery. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A brain aneurysm is an abnormal bulge or "ballooning" in the wall of an artery in the brain. They are sometimes called berry aneurysms because they are often the size of a small berry. Most brain aneurysms produce no symptoms until they become large, begin to leak blood, or burst. If a brain aneurysm presses on nerves in your brain, it can cause signs and symptoms. These can include: A droopy eyelid Double vision or other changes in vision Pain above or behind the eye A dilated pupil Numbness or weakness on one side of the face or body Treatment depends on the size and location of the aneurysm, whether it is infected, and whether it has burst. If a brain aneurysm bursts, symptoms can include a sudden, severe headache, nausea and vomiting, stiff neck, loss of consciousness, and signs of a stroke . Any of these symptoms requires immediate medical attention. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Your brain is the control center of your body. It controls your thoughts, memory, speech, and movement. It regulates the function of many organs. It's part of your nervous system, which also includes your spinal cord and peripheral nerves. The nervous system sends signals between your brain and the rest of the body. Your nerves take in information from your senses and send it to the brain to be processed. Your brain and nerves also communicate to help you move and to control your body's functions. When the brain is healthy, it works quickly and automatically. But when you have a brain disease, it may affect how  well you can function and do your daily activities. Some common brain diseases include: Brain tumors , which can press on nerves and affect brain function. Degenerative nerve diseases , which can affect many of your body's activities, such as balance , movement , talking , breathing , and heart function. Types include Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease . Encephalitis (inflammation in the brain), which can lead to problems such as vision loss , weakness, and paralysis . Genetic brain disorders , which are caused by changes in genes (also called variants or mutations). These disorders can affect the development and function of the brain. Strokes , which can cause a loss of brain cells and can affect your ability to think clearly. Traumatic brain injuries (TBIs), which can affect brain function. They may range from mild to severe. The effects of a TBI may be temporary or permanent. The symptoms of brain diseases vary widely, depending on the specific problem. In some cases, damage is permanent. In other cases, treatments such as surgery, medicines, or therapies such as physical, occupational, and speech therapies, may cure the disease or improve the symptoms.

Most brain malformations begin long before a baby is born. Something damages the developing nervous system or causes it to develop abnormally. Sometimes it's a genetic problem. In other cases, exposure to certain medicines , infections , or radiation during pregnancy interferes with brain development. Parts of the brain may be missing, abnormally small or large, or not fully developed. Treatment depends upon the problem. In many cases, treatment only helps with symptoms. It may include antiseizure medicines, shunts to drain fluid from the brain, and physical therapy. There are head malformations that do not involve the brain. Craniofacial disorders are the result of abnormal growth of soft tissue and bones in the face and head. It's common for new babies to have slightly uneven heads, but parents should watch the shape of their baby's head for possible problems. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A brain tumor is a growth of abnormal cells in the tissues of the brain. Brain tumors can be benign, with no cancer cells, or malignant, with cancer cells that grow quickly.  Some are primary brain tumors, which start in the brain. Others are metastatic, and they start somewhere else in the body and move to the brain. Brain tumors can cause many symptoms. Some of the most common are: Headaches, often in the morning Nausea and vomiting Changes in your ability to talk, hear, or see Problems with balance or walking Problems with thinking or memory Feeling weak or sleepy Changes in your mood or behavior Seizures Doctors diagnose brain tumors by doing a neurologic exam and tests including an MRI, CT scan, and biopsy. Treatment options include watchful waiting, surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Many people get a combination of treatments. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is carpal tunnel syndrome? Carpal tunnel syndrome is the name for a group of problems that includes numbness, tingling, weakness, or pain in your wrist or hand . It's a very common condition that happens when a nerve in your wrist becomes squeezed. The carpal tunnel is a narrow opening between the bones in your wrist and the ligament that holds them together.  A nerve, called the median nerve, runs from your lower arm through the carpal tunnel and into your hand. This nerve provides feeling to your thumb and first three fingers.  It also helps you move your thumb. Tendons also run from your lower arm, through the carpal tunnel, and into your hand. The tendons connect your finger bones to muscles in your arm, so you can bend your fingers. If the tendons become swollen or irritated inside the carpal tunnel, they may press on the nerve. The squeezed nerve may not work well, which can lead to numbness, weakness, and other symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome. What causes carpal tunnel syndrome? In certain cases, the cause of carpal tunnel syndrome is unknown. But it usually happens from a combination of things that affect the structures in your wrist, such as: Injury to your wrist that causes swelling, such as a sprain or broken bone Health conditions that can affect your nerves , joints , or other parts of your wrist, for example: Diabetes . Rheumatoid arthritis . A cyst or tumor in your wrist. Changes in  certain hormones , which may cause swelling from extra fluid in your body. Examples include an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism), pregnancy and menopause. Problems with the way your wrist is formed. Doing the same wrist and hand movements over and over, such as: Assembly line work. Carpentry or using tools that vibrate. Knitting, gardening, or sports, such as golf. Researchers aren't sure whether long-term typing or computer use leads to carpal tunnel syndrome. Who is more likely to develop carpal tunnel syndrome? Carpal tunnel syndrome usually happens only in adults. You're more likely to develop it if you: Are a woman. Women are three times more likely to have carpal tunnel syndrome than men. Have a health condition that may affect structures in your wrist. Do activities with repeated hand motions. Have had a wrist injury. Have a close relative who has had carpal tunnel syndrome, such as a parent, brother or sister. What are the symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome? You may feel numbness, tingling or burning in your fingers, especially in your thumb, index, and middle fingers. Symptoms often affect both hands. In the early stages, symptoms usually: Start slowly in your dominant hand (the one you write with) Happen at night if you sleep with your wrists bent As symptoms get worse, you may notice: Tingling, pain, or weakness with certain activities, such as driving or holding a phone Difficulty grasping or holding small things Feeling like your fingers are swollen when they're not Without treatment, you could lose feeling in some fingers and have permanent weakness in your thumb. But early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent lasting damage. How is carpal tunnel syndrome diagnosed? To find out if you have carpal tunnel syndrome, your health care provider will: Ask about your medical history Ask about your family health history Do a physical exam Order tests if needed , such as: Lab tests to look for diseases that may damage nerves X-rays to look for broken bones or arthritis Tests to measure the electrical activity in your nerves and muscles Ultrasound to check the nerve in the carpal tunnel What are the treatments for carpal tunnel syndrome? It's easier to treat carpal tunnel syndrome early on, so you should start treatment as soon as possible. Your provider will first treat any health conditions you have that may cause your symptoms. The next step would be treatments for carpal tunnel syndrome. They may include: Wrist splints (usually worn at night). Rest. Medicines to reduce swelling and pain: Over-the-counter pain relievers , such as aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen sodium. Prescription steroids , either pills or an injection (shot) into your wrist. Other therapies (complementary and integrative medicine) . Research shows that yoga may help with pain and weakness. Some people may find acupuncture and chiropractic care helpful, but research hasn't shown that these therapies can improve carpal tunnel syndrome. If you want to try other therapies, talk with your provider first. Surgery to make more space in the carpal tunnel. Surgery may be an option if your symptoms are severe and other treatments don't work. It involves cutting the wrist ligament to take pressure off the nerve.  Recovery may take months. Carpal tunnel syndrome rarely comes back after surgery, but mild symptoms may last. Can carpal tunnel syndrome be prevented? You may help prevent carpal tunnel syndrome if you protect your wrists: Use good posture to keep your wrists in a natural position. Keep your hands warm to keep your muscles flexible. Fingerless gloves may help. Take work breaks and vary your tasks. Stretch and exercise your hands and wrists. Organize your workspace and tools to reduce strain on your hands and wrists.

When you play the piano or hit a tennis ball you are activating the cerebellum. The cerebellum is the area of the brain that controls coordination and balance. Problems with the cerebellum include: Cancer Genetic disorders Ataxias - failure of muscle control in the arms and legs that result in movement disorders Degeneration - disorders caused by brain cells decreasing in size or wasting away Treatment of cerebellar disorders depends on the cause. In some cases, there is no cure but treatment may help with symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is cerebral palsy (CP)? Cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of disorders that cause problems with movement , balance , and posture. CP affects the cerebral motor cortex. This is the part of the brain that directs muscle movement. In fact, the first part of the name, cerebral, means having to do with the brain. The second part, palsy, means weakness or problems with using the muscles. What are the types of cerebral palsy (CP)? There are different types of CP: Spastic cerebral palsy , which is the most common type. It causes increased muscle tone, stiff muscles, and awkward movements. Sometimes it only affects one part of the body. In other cases, it can affect both arms and legs, the trunk, and the face. Dyskinetic cerebral palsy , which causes problems controlling the movement of the hands, arms, feet, and legs. This can make it hard to sit and walk. Ataxic cerebral palsy , which causes problems with balance and coordination. Mixed cerebral palsy , which means that you have symptoms of more than one type. What causes cerebral palsy (CP)? CP is caused by abnormal development or damage to the developing brain. It could happen when: The cerebral motor cortex doesn't develop normally during fetal growth There is an injury to the brain before, during, or after birth Both the brain damage and the disabilities it causes are permanent. Who is at risk for cerebral palsy (CP)? CP is more common among boys than girls. It affects black children more often than white children. Certain medical conditions or events that can happen during pregnancy and delivery that may increase a baby's risk of being born with cerebral palsy, including: Being born too small Being born too early Being born a twin or other multiple birth Being conceived by in vitro fertilization (IVF) or other assisted reproductive technology (ART) An infection in the pregnant parent Health problems in the pregnant parent, such as thyroid problems Severe jaundice Having complications during birth Rh incompatibility Seizures Exposure to toxins What are the signs of cerebral palsy (CP)? There are many different types and levels of disability with CP. So the signs can be different in each child. The signs usually appear in the early months of life. But sometimes there is a delay in getting a diagnosis until after age two. Infants with CP often have developmental delays. They are slow to reach developmental milestones such as learning to roll over, sit, crawl, or walk. They may also have abnormal muscle tone. They may seem floppy, or they may be stiff or rigid. It's important to know that children without CP can also have these signs. Contact your child's health care provider know if your child has any of these signs, so you can get a correct diagnosis. How is cerebral palsy (CP) diagnosed? Diagnosing CP involves several steps: Developmental monitoring (or surveillance) means tracking a child's growth and development over time. If there are any concerns about your child's development, then he or she should have a developmental screening test as soon as possible. Developmental screening involves a giving your child a short test to check for motor, movement, or other developmental delays. If the screenings are not normal, the provider will recommend some evaluations. Developmental and medical evaluations are done to diagnose which disorder your child has. The provider many use many tools to make the diagnosis: A check of your child's motor skills, muscle tone, reflexes, and posture. A medical history. Lab tests, genetic tests , and/or imaging tests . What are the treatments for cerebral palsy (CP)? There is no cure for CP, but treatment can improve the lives of those who have it. It is important to begin a treatment program as early as possible. A team of health professionals will work with you and your child to develop a treatment plan. Common treatments include: Medicines Surgery Assistive devices Physical, occupational, recreational, and speech therapy Can cerebral palsy (CP) be prevented? You cannot prevent the genetic problems that can cause CP. But it may be possible to manage or avoid some of the risk factors for CP. For example, making sure that pregnant women have been vaccinated could prevent certain infections that can cause CP in unborn babies. Using cars seats for infants and toddlers could prevent head injuries , which can be a cause of CP. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Chiari malformations (CMs) are structural defects in the cerebellum. The cerebellum is the part of the brain that controls balance.  With CM, brain tissue extends into the spinal canal.  It can happen when part of the skull is too small, which pushes the brain tissue down. There are several types of CM. One type often happens in children who have neural tube defects . Some types cause no symptoms and don't need treatment. If you have symptoms, they may include: Neck pain Balance problems Numbness or other abnormal feelings in the arms or legs Dizziness Vision problems Difficulty swallowing Poor hand coordination Doctors diagnose CM using imaging tests. Medicines may ease some symptoms, such as pain. Surgery is the only treatment available to correct or stop the progression of nerve damage. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Brain tumors are abnormal growths inside the skull. They are among the most common types of childhood cancers . Some are benign tumors, which aren't cancer. They can still be serious. Malignant tumors are cancerous. Childhood brain and spinal cord tumors can cause headaches and other symptoms. However, other conditions can also cause the same symptoms. Check with a doctor if your child has any of the following problems: Morning headache or headache that goes away after vomiting Frequent nausea and vomiting Vision, hearing, and speech problems Loss of balance or trouble walking Unusual sleepiness Personality changes Seizures Increased head size in infants The symptoms are not the same in every child. Doctors use physical and neurological exams, lab tests, and imaging to diagnose brain tumors. Most childhood brain tumors are diagnosed and removed in surgery. Treatment for children is sometimes different than for an adult. Long-term side effects are an important issue. The options also depend on the type of tumor and where it is. Removal of the tumor is often possible. If not, radiation, chemotherapy, or both may be used. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A coma is a deep state of unconsciousness.   An individual in a coma is alive but unable to move or respond to his or her environment. Coma may occur as a complication of an underlying illness, or as a result of injuries, such as brain injury . A coma rarely lasts more than 2 to 4 weeks. The outcome for coma depends on the cause, severity, and site of the damage. People may come out of a coma with physical, intellectual, and psychological problems.  Some people may remain in a coma for years or even decades. For those people, the most common cause of death is infection, such as pneumonia. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a chronic pain condition. It causes intense pain, usually in the arms, hands, legs, or feet. It may happen after an injury, either to a nerve or to tissue in the affected area. Rest and time may only make it worse. Symptoms in the affected area are: Dramatic changes in skin temperature, color, or texture Intense burning pain Extreme skin sensitivity Swelling and stiffness in affected joints Decreased ability to move the affected body part The cause of CRPS is unknown. There is no specific diagnostic test. Your doctor will diagnose CRPS based on your signs and symptoms. There is no cure. It can get worse over time, and may spread to other parts of the body. Occasionally the symptoms go away, either temporarily or for good. Treatment focuses on relieving the pain, and can include medicines, physical therapy, and nerve blocks. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A concussion is a type of brain injury .  It involves a short loss of normal brain function. It happens when a hit to the head or body causes your head and brain to move rapidly back and forth. This sudden movement can cause the brain to bounce around or twist in the skull, creating chemical changes in your brain. Sometimes it can also stretch and damage your brain cells. Sometimes people call a concussion a "mild" brain injury. It is important to understand that while concussions may not be life-threatening, they can still be serious. Concussions are a common type of sports injury . Other causes of concussions include blows to the head, bumping your head when you fall, being violently shaken, and car accidents. Symptoms of a concussion may not start right away; they may start days or weeks after the injury. Symptoms may include a headache or neck pain. You may also have nausea, ringing in your ears, dizziness, or tiredness. You may feel dazed or not your normal self for several days or weeks after the injury. Consult your health care professional if any of your symptoms get worse, or if you have more serious symptoms such as: Convulsions or seizures Drowsiness or inability to wake up A headache that gets worse and does not go away Weakness, numbness, or decreased coordination Repeated vomiting or nausea Confusion Slurred speech Loss of consciousness To diagnose a concussion, your health care provider will do a physical exam and will ask about your injury. You will most likely have a neurological exam, which checks your vision, balance, coordination, and reflexes. Your health care provider may also evaluate your memory and thinking. In some cases, you may also have a scan of the brain, such as a CT scan or an MRI . A scan can check for bleeding or inflammation in the brain, as well as a skull fracture (break in the skull). Most people recover fully after a concussion, but it can take some time. Rest is very important after a concussion because it helps the brain to heal. In the very beginning, you may need to limit physical activities or activities that involve a lot of concentration, such as studying, working on the computer, or playing video games. Doing these may cause concussion symptoms (such as headache or tiredness) to come back or get worse. Then when your health care provider says that it is ok, you can start to return to your normal activities slowly. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a rare, degenerative brain disorder . Symptoms usually start around age 60. Memory problems, behavior changes, vision problems, and poor muscle coordination progress quickly to dementia , coma, and death. Most patients die within a year. The three main categories of CJD are  : Sporadic CJD, which occurs for no known reason Hereditary CJD, which runs in families Acquired CJD, which occurs from contact with infected tissue, usually during a medical procedure Cattle can get a disease related to CJD called bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or "mad cow disease."  There is concern that people can get a variant of CJD from eating beef from an infected animal, but there is no direct proof to support this. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Degenerative nerve diseases affect many of your body's activities, such as balance, movement, talking, breathing, and heart function.   Many of these diseases are genetic. Sometimes the cause is a medical condition such as alcoholism, a tumor, or a stroke. Other causes may include toxins, chemicals, and viruses.  Sometimes the cause is unknown. Degenerative nerve diseases include: Alzheimer's disease Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Friedreich ataxia Huntington's disease Lewy body disease Parkinson's disease Spinal muscular atrophy Degenerative nerve diseases can be serious or life-threatening. It depends on the type. Most of them have no cure. Treatments may help improve symptoms, relieve pain, and increase mobility.

What is delirium? Delirium is a mental state in which you are confused, disoriented, and not able to think or remember clearly. It usually starts suddenly. It is often temporary and treatable. There are three types of delirium: Hypoactive, when you are not active and seem sleepy, tired, or depressed Hyperactive, when you are restless or agitated Mixed, when you change back and forth between being hypoactive and hyperactive What causes delirium? There are many different problems that can cause delirium. Some of the more common causes include: Advanced cancer . Alcohol or drugs , either from intoxication or withdrawal. This includes a serious type of alcohol withdrawal syndrome called delirium tremens. It usually happens to people who stop drinking after years of alcohol use disorder (AUD) . Dehydration and electrolyte imbalances . Dementia . Hospitalization , especially in intensive care. Infections , such as urinary tract infections , pneumonia , and the flu . Medicines. This could be a side effect of a medicine, such as sedatives or opioids . Or it could be from withdrawal after stopping a medicine. Metabolic disorders . Organ failure , such as kidney or liver failure. Poisoning . Serious illnesses . Severe pain . Sleep deprivation . Surgeries , including reactions to anesthesia . Who is more likely to get delirium? Certain factors put you at risk for delirium, including: Being in a hospital or nursing home Having dementia Having a serious illness or more than one illness Having an infection Older age Having surgery Taking medicines that affect the mind or behavior Taking high doses of pain medicines , such as opioids What are the symptoms of delirium? The symptoms of delirium usually start suddenly, over a few hours or a few days. They often come and go. The most common symptoms include: Changes in alertness (usually more alert in the morning, less at night) Changing levels of consciousness Confusion Disorganized thinking, talking in a way that doesn't make sense Disrupted sleep patterns, sleepiness Emotional changes: anger, agitation, depression , irritability, overexcitement Hallucinations and delusions Memory problems, especially with short-term memory Trouble concentrating How is delirium diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Physical and neurological exams Mental status testing, which checks for problems with your thinking and alertness Lab and diagnostic imaging tests Delirium and dementia have similar symptoms, so it can be hard to tell them apart. You can also have both at the same time. The differences between them are that: Delirium starts suddenly and can cause hallucinations. It is mainly a problem with attention and staying alert. The symptoms may get better or worse and can last for hours or weeks. Dementia develops slowly and does not cause hallucinations. It usually starts with memory loss. The symptoms don't change often, like they can with delirium. Dementia almost never gets better. What are the treatments for delirium? Treatment of delirium focuses on the causes and symptoms of delirium. The first step is to identify the cause. Often, treating the cause will lead to a full recovery. The recovery may take some time - weeks or sometimes even months. In the meantime, there may be treatments to manage the symptoms, such as: Controlling the environment, which includes making sure that the room is quiet and well-lit, having clocks or calendars in view, and having family members around Medicines, including those that control aggression or agitation and pain relievers if there is pain If needed, making sure that the person has a hearing aid, glasses, or other devices for communication Can delirium be prevented? Treating the conditions that can cause delirium may reduce the risk of getting it. Hospitals can help lower the risk of delirium by avoiding sedatives and making sure that hospital rooms are kept quiet, calm, and well-lit. It can also help to have family members around and to have the same staff members treat the person each day (if possible).

What is dementia? Dementia is a loss of mental functions that is severe enough to affect your daily life and activities. These functions include: Memory Language skills Visual perception (your ability to make sense of what you see) Problem solving Trouble with everyday tasks The ability to focus and pay attention It is normal to become a bit more forgetful as you age. But dementia is not a normal part of aging. It is a serious disorder which interferes with your daily life. What are the types of dementia? The most common types of dementia are known as neurodegenerative disorders. These are diseases in which the cells of the brain stop working or die. They include: Alzheimer's disease , which is the most common form of dementia among older people. People with Alzheimer's have plaques and tangles in their brain. These are abnormal buildups of different proteins. Beta-amyloid protein clumps up and forms plaques in between your brain cells. Tau protein builds up and forms tangles inside the nerve cells of your brain. There is also a loss of connection between nerve cells in the brain. Lewy body dementia , which causes movement symptoms along with dementia. Lewy bodies are abnormal deposits of a protein in the brain. Frontotemporal disorders, which cause changes to certain parts of the brain: Changes in the frontal lobe lead to behavioral symptoms Changes in the temporal lobe lead to language and emotional disorders Vascular dementia, which involves changes to the brain's blood supply. It is often caused by a stroke or atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) in the brain. Mixed dementia, which is a combination of two or more types of dementia. For example, some people have both Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Other conditions can cause dementia or dementia-like symptoms, including: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , a rare brain disorder Huntington's disease , an inherited, progressive brain disease Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), caused by repeated traumatic brain injury HIV-associated dementia (HAD) Who is at risk for dementia? Certain factors can raise your risk for developing dementia, including: Aging. This is the biggest risk factor for dementia. Smoking Uncontrolled diabetes High blood pressure Drinking too much alcohol Having close family members who have dementia What are the symptoms of dementia? The symptoms of dementia can vary, depending on which parts of the brain are affected. Often, forgetfulness is the first symptom.  Dementia also causes problems with the ability to think, problem solve, and reason. For example, people with dementia may: Get lost in a familiar neighborhood Use unusual words to refer to familiar objects Forget the name of a close family member or friend Forget old memories Need help doing tasks that they used to do by themselves Some people with dementia cannot control their emotions and their personalities may change. They may become apathetic, meaning that they are no longer interested in normal daily activities or events. They may lose their inhibitions and stop caring about other peoples' feelings. Certain types of dementia can also cause problems with balance and movement. The stages of dementia range from mild to severe. In the mildest stage, it is just beginning to affect a person's functioning. In the most severe stage, the person is completely dependent on others for care. How is dementia diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam Tests of your thinking, memory, and language abilities Other tests, such as blood tests, genetic tests , and brain scans A mental health evaluation to see whether a mental disorder is contributing to your symptoms What are the treatments for dementia? There is no cure for most types of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementia. Treatments may help to maintain mental function longer, manage behavioral symptoms, and slow down the symptoms of disease. They may include: Medicines may temporarily improve memory and thinking or slow down their decline. They only work in some people. Other medicines can treat symptoms such as anxiety, depression, sleep problems, and muscle stiffness. Some of these medicines can cause strong side effects in people with dementia. It is important to talk to your health care provider about which medicines will be safe for you. Occupational therapy to help find ways to more easily do everyday activities Speech therapy to help with swallowing difficulties and trouble speaking loudly and clearly Mental health counseling to help people with dementia and their families learn how to manage difficult emotions and behaviors. It can also help them plan for the future. Music or art therapy to reduce anxiety and improve well-being Can dementia be prevented? Researchers have not found a proven way to prevent dementia. Living a healthy lifestyle might influence some of your risk factors for dementia.

If you have diabetes , your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Over time, this can damage the covering on your nerves or the blood vessels that bring oxygen to your nerves. Damaged nerves may stop sending messages, or may send messages slowly or at the wrong times. This damage is called diabetic neuropathy.  Over half of people with diabetes get it.  Symptoms may include: Numbness in your hands, legs, or feet Shooting pains, burning, or tingling Nausea, vomiting, constipation, or diarrhea Problems with sexual function Urinary problems Dizziness when you change positions quickly Your doctor will diagnose diabetic neuropathy with a physical exam and nerve tests. Controlling your blood sugar can help prevent nerve problems, or keep them from getting worse. Treatment may include pain relief and other medicines. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is encephalitis? Encephalitis is inflammation (swelling) of the brain. It can happen when an infection or medical condition that affects the brain activates your immune system. The inflammation can cause a wide range of symptoms. In extreme cases, it can lead to brain damage, stroke , or even death. What causes encephalitis? There are different types of encephalitis, based on what the cause is. The two main types are infectious encephalitis and autoimmune encephalitis. Infectious encephalitis is usually caused by a virus . In fact, viruses are the most common cause of encephalitis. Some of the different viruses that cause it include: Herpes viruses, including herpes simplex (HSV), the Epstein-Barr virus (which causes infectious mononucleosis ) and the varicella-zoster virus (which causes chickenpox ). Viruses you can get if you are bitten by an infected tick , such as tick-borne encephalitis (TBE virus) and Powassan virus. Viruses you can get if you are bitten by an infected mosquito , such as eastern equine encephalitis virus, West Nile virus , and La Crosse virus. Enteroviruses, which are a common group of viruses that mostly cause mild illness or respiratory infection. These infections usually happen in the summer and fall. Bacteria , fungi , and parasites can also cause infectious encephalitis. But this is not common. Autoimmune encephalitis happens when your immune system mistakenly attacks healthy brain cells. It can be triggered by conditions such as certain cancers, benign tumors , and infections. Sometimes the cause is not known. Who is more likely to get encephalitis? Anyone can get encephalitis, but you are more likely to get it if you: Have a weakened immune system, for example from having HIV or taking certain medicines. These could include medicines taken after an organ transplant , certain chemotherapy medicines, and specialized treatments for certain autoimmune diseases . Are a young child or older adult. Live in areas where there are ticks and mosquitoes that carry viruses that can cause encephalitis. What are the symptoms of encephalitis? The symptoms of encephalitis can vary a lot, depending on how severe it is. Many people do not have any symptoms. Others may have mild flu-like symptoms such as fever , fatigue , headache , or body aches. If encephalitis becomes more serious, it can cause: Severe headache Stiff neck Vomiting Seizures Behavior changes Drowsiness Muscle weakness Partial paralysis in your arms and legs Coma Encephalitis can be dangerous in infants. Their symptoms may include: Fever Lethargy (weakness or drowsiness) Poor feeding Vomiting Body stiffness Unusual irritability or crying A full or bulging fontanel (the soft spot on the top of the head) If you or your child is having symptoms of encephalitis, it's important to get medical care right away. How is encephalitis diagnosed? To find out if you have encephalitis, your health care provider: Will do a physical exam Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms May do a neurologic exam May order imaging tests , such as a brain CT scan or MRI May order an EEG (electroencephalography), which use small electric sensors to measure your brain activity May order blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests What are the treatments for encephalitis? Most people with encephalitis will need treatment in the hospital. Depending on the cause, treatments may include antiviral medicines, antibiotics , corticosteroids , and other medicines. For some types of encephalitis, there is no medicine to treat it. But rest, nutrition, and fluids can help your body fight the infection and relieve symptoms. Some people may need physical, speech, and occupational therapy once the illness is under control. Can encephalitis be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent encephalitis that is caused by infections: Use good hygiene , including washing your hands often with soap and water. Don't share food, drinks, utensils, and glasses with other people. Get vaccines for viruses that can cause encephalitis. Avoid mosquito and tick bites, for example by: Wearing insect repellent with DEET or another U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. Make sure to follow the instructions for using the repellant. Wearing clothes that cover your arms, legs and feet. Treating your clothing and gear with products containing 0.5% permethrin before you go in grassy or woody areas. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Epilepsy is a brain disorder that causes people to have recurring seizures .  The seizures happen when clusters of nerve cells, or neurons, in the brain send out the wrong signals. People may have strange sensations and emotions or behave strangely. They may have violent muscle spasms or lose consciousness. Epilepsy has many possible causes, including illness, brain injury, and abnormal brain development. In many cases, the cause is unknown. Doctors use brain scans and other tests to diagnose epilepsy. It is important to start treatment right away. There is no cure for epilepsy, but medicines can control seizures for most people. When medicines are not working well, surgery or implanted devices such as vagus nerve stimulators may help. Special diets can help some children with epilepsy. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Fainting is a temporary loss of consciousness. If you're about to faint, you'll feel dizzy, lightheaded, or nauseous. Your field of vision may "white out" or "black out."  Your skin may be cold and clammy.  You lose muscle control at the same time, and may fall down. Fainting usually happens when your blood pressure drops suddenly, causing a decrease in blood flow to your brain. It is more common in older people. Some causes of fainting include: Heat or dehydration Emotional distress Standing up too quickly Certain medicines Drop in blood sugar Heart problems When someone faints, make sure that the airway is clear and check for breathing. The person should stay lying down for 10-15 minutes.  Most people recover completely. Fainting is usually nothing to worry about, but it can sometimes be a sign of a serious problem. If you faint, it's important to see your health care provider and find out why it happened.

A genetic brain disorder is caused by a variation or a mutation in a gene.  A variation is a different form of a gene. A mutation is a change in a gene. Genetic brain disorders affect the development and function of the brain. Some genetic brain disorders are due to random gene mutations or mutations caused by environmental exposure, such as cigarette smoke. Other disorders are inherited, which means that a mutated gene or group of genes is passed down through a family. They can also be due to a combination of both genetic changes and other outside factors. Some examples of genetic brain disorders include: Leukodystrophies Phenylketonuria Tay-Sachs disease Wilson disease Many people with genetic brain disorders fail to produce enough of certain proteins that influence brain development and function. These brain disorders can cause serious problems that affect the nervous system. Some have treatments to control symptoms.  Some are life-threatening.

Almost everyone has had a headache. Headache is the most common form of pain. It's a major reason people miss days at work or school or visit the doctor. The most common type of headache is a tension headache. Tension headaches are due to tight muscles in your shoulders, neck, scalp and jaw. They are often related to stress, depression or anxiety. You are more likely to get tension headaches if you work too much, don't get enough sleep, miss meals, or use alcohol. Other common types of headaches include migraines , cluster headaches, and sinus headaches. Most people can feel much better by making lifestyle changes, learning ways to relax and taking pain relievers . Not all headaches require a doctor's attention. But sometimes headaches warn of a more serious disorder. Let your health care provider know if you have sudden, severe headaches. Get medical help right away if you have a headache after a blow to your head, or if you have a headache along with a stiff neck, fever, confusion, loss of consciousness, or pain in the eye or ear. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A stroke is a medical emergency. There are two types - ischemic and hemorrhagic. Hemorrhagic stroke is the less common type. It happens when a blood vessel breaks and bleeds into the brain. Within minutes, brain cells begin to die. Causes include a bleeding aneurysm , an arteriovenous malformation (AVM), or an artery wall that breaks open. Symptoms of stroke are: Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg (especially on one side of the body) Sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding speech Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination Sudden severe headache with no known cause It is important to treat strokes as quickly as possible. With a hemorrhagic stroke, the first steps are to find the cause of bleeding in the brain and then control it.  Surgery may be needed. Post-stroke rehabilitation can help people overcome disabilities caused by stroke damage. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited disease that causes certain nerve cells in the brain to waste away. People are born with the defective gene, but symptoms usually don't appear until middle age. Early symptoms of HD may include uncontrolled movements, clumsiness, and balance problems. Later, HD can take away the ability to walk, talk, and swallow. Some people stop recognizing family members. Others are aware of their environment and are able to express emotions. If one of your parents has Huntington's disease, you have a 50% chance of getting it. A blood test can tell you if have the HD gene and will develop the disease. Genetic counseling can help you weigh the risks and benefits of taking the test. There is no cure.  Medicines can help manage some of the symptoms, but cannot slow down or stop the disease. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Hydrocephalus is the buildup of too much cerebrospinal fluid in the brain. Normally, this fluid cushions your brain. When you have too much, though, it puts harmful pressure on your brain. Hydrocephalus can be congenital, or present at birth. Causes include genetic problems and problems with how the fetus develops. An unusually large head is the main sign of congenital hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus can also happen after birth. This is called acquired hydrocephalus. It can occur at any age. Causes can include head injuries, strokes, infections, tumors, and bleeding in the brain. Symptoms include: Headache Vomiting and nausea Blurry vision Balance problems Bladder control problems Thinking and memory problems Hydrocephalus can permanently damage the brain, causing problems with physical and mental development. If untreated, it is usually fatal. With treatment, many people lead normal lives with few limitations. Treatment usually involves surgery to insert a shunt. A shunt is a flexible but sturdy plastic tube. The shunt moves the cerebrospinal fluid to another area of the body where it can be absorbed. Medicine and rehabilitation therapy can also help. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A stroke is a medical emergency. There are two types - ischemic and hemorrhagic . Ischemic stroke is the more common type. It is usually caused by a blood clot that blocks or plugs a blood vessel in the brain. This keeps blood from flowing to the brain. Within minutes, brain cells begin to die.  Another cause is stenosis, or narrowing of the artery. This can happen because of atherosclerosis , a disease in which plaque builds up inside your arteries. Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) occur when the blood supply to the brain is interrupted briefly. Having a TIA can mean you are at risk for having a more serious stroke. Symptoms of stroke are: Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm or leg (especially on one side of the body) Sudden confusion, trouble speaking or understanding speech Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination Sudden severe headache with no known cause It is important to treat strokes as quickly as possible. Blood thinners may be used to stop a stroke while it is happening by quickly dissolving the blood clot. Post-stroke rehabilitation can help people overcome disabilities caused by stroke damage. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is Lewy body dementia (LBD)? Lewy body dementia (LBD) is one of the most common types of dementia in older adults. Dementia is a loss of mental functions that is severe enough to affect your daily life and activities. These functions include: Memory Language skills Visual perception (your ability to make sense of what you see) Problem solving Trouble with everyday tasks The ability to focus and pay attention What are the types of Lewy body dementia (LBD)? There are two types of LBD: dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease dementia. Both types cause the same changes in the brain. And, over time, they can cause similar symptoms. The main difference is in when the cognitive (thinking) and movement symptoms start. Dementia with Lewy bodies causes problems with thinking ability that seem similar to Alzheimer's disease . Later, it also causes other symptoms, such as movement symptoms, visual hallucinations, and certain sleep disorders . It also causes more trouble with mental activities than with memory. Parkinson's disease dementia starts as a movement disorder. It first causes the symptoms of Parkinson's disease : slowed movement, muscle stiffness, tremor, and a shuffling walk. Later on, it causes dementia. What causes Lewy body dementia (LBD)? LBD happens when Lewy bodies build up in parts of the brain that control memory, thinking, and movement.  Lewy bodies are abnormal deposits of a protein called alpha-synuclein. Researchers don't know exactly why these deposits form. But they do know that other diseases, such as Parkinson's disease, also involve a build-up of that protein. Who is at risk for Lewy body dementia (LBD)? The biggest risk factor for LBD is age; most people who get it are over age 50. People who have a family history of LBD are also at higher risk. What are the symptoms of Lewy body dementia (LBD)? LBD is a progressive disease. This means that the symptoms start slowly and get worse over time. The most common symptoms include changes in cognition, movement, sleep, and behavior: Dementia , which is a loss of mental functions that is severe enough to affect your daily life and activities Changes in concentration, attention, alertness, and wakefulness. These changes usually happen from day to day. But sometimes they can also happen throughout the same day. Visual hallucinations , which means seeing things that are not there Problems with movement and posture , including slowness of movement, difficulty walking, and muscle stiffness. These are called parkinsonian motor symptoms. REM sleep behavior disorder , a condition in which a person seems to act out dreams. It may include vivid dreaming, talking in one's sleep, violent movements, or falling out of bed. This may be the earliest symptom of LBD in some people. It can appear several years before any other LBD symptoms. Changes in behavior and mood , such as depression , anxiety , and apathy (a lack of interest in normal daily activities or events) In the early stages of LBD, symptoms can be mild, and people can function fairly normally. As the disease gets worse, people with LBD need more help due to problems with thinking and movement. In the later stages of the disease, they often cannot care for themselves. How is Lewy body dementia (LBD) diagnosed? There isn't one test that can diagnose LBD. It is important to see an experienced doctor to get a diagnosis. This would usually be specialist such as a neurologist. The doctor will: Do a medical history, including taking a detailed account of the symptoms. The doctor will talk to both the patient and caregivers. Do physical and neurological exams Do tests to rule out other conditions that could cause similar symptoms. These could include blood tests and brain imaging tests . Do neuropsychological tests to evaluate memory and other cognitive functions LBD can be hard to diagnose, because Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease cause similar symptoms. Scientists think that Lewy body disease might be related to these diseases, or that they sometimes happen together. It's also important to know which type of LBD a person has, so the doctor can treat that type's particular symptoms. It also helps the doctor understand how the disease will affect the person over time. The doctor makes a diagnosis based on when certain symptoms start: If cognitive symptoms start within a year of movement problems, the diagnosis is dementia with Lewy bodies If cognitive problems start more than a year after the movement problems, the diagnosis is Parkinson's disease dementia What are the treatments for Lewy body dementia (LBD)? There is no cure for LBD, but treatments can help with the symptoms: Medicines may help with some of the cognitive, movement, and psychiatric symptoms Physical therapy can help with movement problems Occupational therapy may help find ways to more easily do everyday activities Speech therapy may help with swallowing difficulties and trouble speaking loudly and clearly Mental health counseling can help people with LBD and their families learn how to manage difficult emotions and behaviors. It can also help them plan for the future. Music or art therapy may reduce anxiety and improve well-being Support groups can also be helpful for people with LBD and their caregivers. Support groups can give emotional and social support. They are also a place where people can share tips about how to deal with day-to-day challenges. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Every day, you have different experiences and you learn new things. Your brain cannot store all of that information, so it has to decide what is worth remembering. Memory is the process of storing and then remembering this information. There are different types of memory. Short-term memory stores information for a few seconds or minutes. Long-term memory stores it for a longer period of time. Memory doesn't always work perfectly. As you grow older, it may take longer to remember things. It's normal to forget things once in a while. We've all forgotten a name, where we put our keys, or if we locked the front door. If you are an older adult who forget things more often than others your age, you may have mild cognitive impairment . Forgetting how to use your phone or find your way home may be signs of a more serious problem, such as: Alzheimer's disease Other types of dementia Stroke Depression Head injuries Blood clots or tumors in the brain Kidney , liver , or thyroid problems Reactions to certain medicines If you're worried about your forgetfulness, see your health care provider. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Meningitis is inflammation of the thin tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord, called the meninges. There are several types of meningitis. The most common is viral meningitis. You get it when a virus enters the body through the nose or mouth and travels to the brain. Bacterial meningitis is rare but can be deadly. It usually starts with bacteria that cause a cold-like infection. It can cause stroke , hearing loss , and brain damage. It can also harm other organs. Pneumococcal infections and meningococcal infections are the most common causes of bacterial meningitis. Anyone can get meningitis, but it is more common in people with weak immune systems. Meningitis can get serious very quickly. You should get medical care right away if you have: A sudden high fever A severe headache A stiff neck Nausea or vomiting Early treatment can help prevent serious problems, including death. Tests to diagnose meningitis include blood tests, imaging tests, and a spinal tap to test cerebrospinal fluid. Antibiotics can treat bacterial meningitis. Antiviral medicines may help some types of viral meningitis. Other medicines can help treat symptoms. There are vaccines to prevent some of the bacterial infections that cause meningitis. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What are migraines? Migraines are a recurring type of headache. They cause moderate to severe pain that is throbbing or pulsing. The pain is often on one side of your head. You may also have other symptoms, such as nausea and weakness. You may be sensitive to light and sound. What causes migraines? Researchers believe that migraine has a genetic cause. There are also a number of factors that can trigger a migraine. These factors vary from person to person, and they include: Stress Anxiety Hormonal changes in women Bright or flashing lights Loud noises Strong smells Medicines Too much or not enough sleep Sudden changes in weather or environment Overexertion (too much physical activity) Tobacco Caffeine or caffeine withdrawal Skipped meals Medication overuse (taking medicine for migraines too often) Some people have found that certain foods or ingredients can trigger headaches, especially when they are combined with other triggers. These foods and ingredients include: Alcohol Chocolate Aged cheeses Monosodium glutamate (MSG) Some fruits and nuts Fermented or pickled goods Yeast Cured or processed meats Who is at risk for migraines? About 12% of Americans get migraines. They can affect anyone, but you are more likely to have them if you: Are a woman. Women are three times more likely than men to get migraines. Have a family history of migraines. Most people with migraines have family members who have migraines. Have other medical conditions, such as depression , anxiety , bipolar disorder , sleep disorders , and epilepsy . What are the symptoms of migraines? There are four different phases of migraines. You may not always go through every phase each time you have a migraine.: Prodome. This phase starts up to 24 hours before you get the migraine. You have early signs and symptoms, such as food cravings, unexplained mood changes, uncontrollable yawning, fluid retention, and increased urination. Aura. If you have this phase, you might see flashing or bright lights or zig-zag lines. You may have muscle weakness or feel like you are being touched or grabbed. An aura can happen just before or during a migraine. Headache. A migraine usually starts gradually and then becomes more severe. It typically causes throbbing or pulsing pain, which is often on one side of your head. But sometimes you can have a migraine without a headache. Other migraine symptoms may include Increased sensitivity to light, noise, and odors Nausea and vomiting Worsened pain when you move, cough, or sneeze Postdrome (following the headache). You may feel exhausted, weak, and confused after a migraine. This can last up to a day. Migraines are more common in the morning; people often wake up with them. Some people have migraines at predictable times, such as before menstruation or on weekends following a stressful week of work. How are migraines diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will: Take your medical history Ask about your symptoms Do a physical and neurological exam An important part of diagnosing migraines is to rule out other medical conditions which could be causing the symptoms. So you may also have blood tests, an MRI or CT scan, or other tests. How are migraines treated? There is no cure for migraines. Treatment focuses on relieving symptoms and preventing additional attacks. There are different types of medicines to relieve symptoms. They include triptan drugs, ergotamine drugs, and pain relievers . The sooner you take the medicine, the more effective it is. There are also other things you can do to feel better: Resting with your eyes closed in a quiet, darkened room Placing a cool cloth or ice pack on your forehead Drinking fluids There are some lifestyle changes you can make to prevent migraines: Stress management strategies, such as exercise, relaxation techniques, and biofeedback, may reduce the number and severity of migraines. Biofeedback uses electronic devices to teach you to control certain body functions, such as your heartbeat, blood pressure, and muscle tension. Make a log of what seems to trigger your migraines. You can learn what you need to avoid, such as certain foods and medicines. It also help you figure out what you should do, such as establishing a consistent sleep schedule and eating regular meals. Hormone therapy may help some women whose migraines seem to be linked to their menstrual cycle If you have obesity , losing weight may also be helpful If you have frequent or severe migraines, you may need to take medicines to prevent further attacks. Talk with your health care provider about which drug would be right for you. Certain natural treatments, such as riboflavin (vitamin B2) and coenzyme Q10, may help prevent migraines. If your magnesium level is low, you can try taking magnesium. There is also an herb, butterbur, which some people take to prevent migraines. But butterbur may not be safe for long-term use. Always check with your health care provider before taking any supplements. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Some forgetfulness can be a normal part of aging.   However, some people have more memory problems than other people their age. This condition is called mild cognitive impairment, or MCI. People with MCI can take care of themselves and do their normal activities. MCI memory problems may include: Losing things often Forgetting to go to events and appointments Having more trouble coming up with words than other people of the same age Memory problems can also have other causes, including certain medicines and diseases that affect the blood vessels that supply the brain. Some of the problems brought on by these conditions can be managed or reversed. Your health care provider can do thinking, memory, and language tests to see if you have MCI. You may also need to see a specialist for more tests. Because MCI may be an early sign of Alzheimer's disease , it's really important to see your health care provider every 6 to 12 months. At this time, there is no proven drug treatment for MCI. Your health care provider can check to see if you have any changes in your memory or thinking skills over time. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a nervous system disease that affects your brain and spinal cord.  It damages the myelin sheath, the material that surrounds and protects your nerve cells. This damage slows down or blocks messages between your brain and your body, leading to the symptoms of MS. They can include: Visual disturbances Muscle weakness Trouble with coordination and balance Sensations such as numbness, prickling, or "pins and needles" Thinking and memory problems No one knows what causes MS. It may be an autoimmune disease, which happens when your immune system attacks healthy cells in your body by mistake. Multiple sclerosis affects women more than men. It often begins between the ages of 20 and 40.  Usually, the disease is mild, but some people lose the ability to write, speak, or walk. There is no specific test for MS.  Doctors use a medical history, physical exam, neurological exam, MRI, and other tests to diagnose it. There is no cure for MS, but medicines may slow it down and help control symptoms. Physical and occupational therapy may also help. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Neural tube defects are birth defects of the brain, spine, or spinal cord. They happen in the first month of pregnancy, often before a woman even knows that she is pregnant. The two most common neural tube defects are spina bifida and anencephaly. In spina bifida, the fetal spinal column doesn't close completely. There is usually nerve damage that causes at least some paralysis of the legs. In anencephaly, most of the brain and skull do not develop. Babies with anencephaly are usually either stillborn or die shortly after birth. Another type of defect, Chiari malformation , causes the brain tissue to extend into the spinal canal. The exact causes of neural tube defects aren't known. You're at greater risk of having an infant with a neural tube defect if you: Have obesity Have poorly controlled diabetes Take certain antiseizure medicines Getting enough folic acid , a type of B vitamin, before and during pregnancy prevents most neural tube defects. Neural tube defects are usually diagnosed before the infant is born, through lab or imaging tests. There is no cure for neural tube defects. The nerve damage and loss of function that are present at birth are usually permanent. However, a variety of treatments can sometimes prevent further damage and help with complications. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is neuroblastoma? Neuroblastoma is a type of cancer that forms in nerve cells called neuroblasts. Neuroblasts are immature nerve tissue. They normally turn into working nerve cells. But in neuroblastoma, they form a tumor. Neuroblastoma usually begins in the adrenal glands . You have two adrenal glands, one on top of each kidney. The adrenal glands make important hormones that help control heart rate, blood pressure, blood glucose (blood sugar), and the way the body reacts to stress. Neuroblastoma may also begin in the neck, chest or spinal cord. What causes neuroblastoma? Neuroblastoma is caused by changes in your genes . Gene changes also called gene variants or mutations. In most cases, the cause of the mutation is unknown. In some other cases, the mutation is passed from the parent to the child. What are the symptoms of neuroblastoma? Neuroblastoma often begins in early childhood . Sometimes it begins before a child is born.The most common symptoms are caused by the tumor pressing on nearby tissues as it grows or by cancer spreading to the bone.They include: A lump in the abdomen, neck, or chest Bulging eyes Dark circles around the eyes Bone pain Swollen stomach and trouble breathing in babies Painless, bluish lumps under the skin in babies Weakness or paralysis (loss of ability to move a body part) How is neuroblastoma diagnosed? To diagnose neuroblastoma, your child's health care provider will do various tests and procedures, which may include: A medical history. A neurological exam . Imaging test s, such as x-rays , a CT scan , an ultrasound , an MRI , or an MIBG scan. In an MIBG scan, a small amount of a radioactive substance is injected into a vein. It travels through the bloodstream and attaches itself to any neuroblastoma cells. A scanner detects the cells. Blood and urine tests. Biopsy , in which a sample of tissue is removed and examined under a microscope. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, in which bone marrow, blood, and a small piece of bone are removed for testing. What are the treatments for neuroblastoma? The treatments for neuroblastoma include: Observation, also called watchful waiting, is where the health care provider does not give any treatments until your child's signs or symptoms appear or change. Surgery Radiation therapy . Chemotherapy . High-dose chemotherapy and radiation therapy with stem cell rescue. Your child will get high doses of chemotherapy and radiation. This kills the cancer cells, but it also kills healthy cells. So your child will get a stem cell transplant , usually of his or her own cells collected earlier. This helps to replace the healthy cells that were lost. Iodine 131-MIBG therapy, a treatment with radioactive iodine. The radioactive iodine collects in neuroblastoma cells and kills them with the radiation that is given off. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Neurofibromatosis is a genetic disorder of the nervous system. It mainly affects how nerve cells form and grow. It causes tumors to grow on nerves.  You can get neurofibromatosis from your parents, or it can happen because of a mutation (change) in your genes.  Once you have it, you can pass it along to your children. Usually the tumors are benign, but sometimes they can become cancerous. There are three types of neurofibromatosis: Type 1 (NF1) causes skin changes and deformed bones. It usually starts in childhood.  Sometimes the symptoms are present at birth. Type 2 (NF2) causes hearing loss, ringing in the ears, and poor balance. Symptoms often start in the teen years. Schwannomatosis causes intense pain. It is the rarest type. Doctors diagnose the different types based on the symptoms. Genetic testing is also used to diagnose NF1 and NF2. There is no cure. Treatment can help control symptoms. Depending on the type of disease and how serious it is, treatment may include surgery to remove tumors, radiation therapy, and medicines. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

The brain, spinal cord, and nerves make up the nervous system. Together they control all the workings of the body. When something goes wrong with a part of your nervous system, you can have trouble moving, speaking, swallowing, breathing, or learning.  You can also have problems with your memory, senses, or mood. There are more than 600 neurologic diseases. Major types include: Diseases caused by faulty genes, such as Huntington's disease and muscular dystrophy Problems with the way the nervous system develops, such as spina bifida Degenerative diseases , where nerve cells are damaged or die, such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease Diseases of the  blood vessels that supply the brain, such as stroke Injuries to the spinal cord and brain Seizure disorders, such as epilepsy Cancer, such as brain tumors infections, such as meningitis

Neuromuscular disorders affect your neuromuscular system. They can cause problems with: The nerves that control your muscles Your muscles Communication between your nerves and muscles These disorders can cause your muscles to become weak and waste away. You may also have symptoms such as spasms, twitching, and pain. Examples of neuromuscular disorders include: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Muscular dystrophy Myasthenia gravis Spinal muscular atrophy There can be different causes for these diseases. Many of them are genetic.This means they are inherited (run in families) or are caused by a new mutation in your genes. Some neuromuscular disorders are autoimmune diseases . Sometimes the cause is unknown. Many neuromuscular diseases have no cure. But treatments may improve symptoms, increase mobility, and lengthen life.

Pain is a signal in your nervous system that something may be wrong. It is an unpleasant feeling, such as a prick, tingle, sting, burn, or ache. Pain may be sharp or dull. It may come and go, or it may be constant. You may feel pain in one area of your body, such as your back , abdomen , chest , pelvis , or you may feel pain all over. Pain can be helpful in diagnosing a problem. If you never felt pain, you might seriously hurt yourself without knowing it, or you might not realize you have a medical problem that needs treatment. There are two types of pain: acute and chronic . Acute pain usually comes on suddenly, because of a disease, injury, or inflammation. It can often be diagnosed and treated. It usually goes away, though sometimes it can turn into chronic pain. Chronic pain lasts for a long time, and can cause severe problems. Pain is not always curable, but there are many ways to treat it. Treatment depends on the cause and type of pain. There are drug treatments, including pain relievers . There are also non-drug treatments , such as acupuncture , physical therapy, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a type of movement disorder . It happens when nerve cells in the brain don't produce enough of a brain chemical called dopamine. Sometimes it is genetic, but most cases do not seem to run in families. Exposure to chemicals in the environment might play a role. Symptoms begin gradually, often on one side of the body.  Later they affect both sides. They  include: Trembling of hands, arms, legs, jaw and face Stiffness of the arms, legs and trunk Slowness of movement Poor balance and coordination As symptoms get worse, people with the disease may have trouble walking, talking, or doing simple tasks. They may also have problems such as depression, sleep problems, or trouble chewing, swallowing, or speaking. There is no specific test for PD, so it can be difficult to diagnose.  Doctors use a medical history and a neurological examination to diagnose it. PD usually begins around age 60, but it can start earlier. It is more common in men than in women. There is no cure for PD. A variety of medicines sometimes help symptoms dramatically. Surgery and deep brain stimulation (DBS) can help severe cases. With DBS, electrodes are surgically implanted in the brain. They send electrical pulses to stimulate the parts of the brain that control movement. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What are peripheral nerves? Nerves are like wires that carry messages back and forth between your brain and your body. Your peripheral nerves branch off from your brain and spinal cord and connect to all parts of your body, including your muscles and organs. Peripheral nerves carry messages from your brain that control your movement, breathing, heartbeat, digestion, and more. They also carry messages from your body to your brain, so you can feel things, such as pain, heat, and cold. What are peripheral nerve disorders? Peripheral nerve disorders happen when one or more peripheral nerves are damaged. Damaged nerves may not carry messages correctly, or they may not work at all. As a result, you may have pain , trouble walking , or a variety of other problems, depending on which nerves are involved. Peripheral nerve disorders are very common. There are more than 100 different types. What causes peripheral nerve disorders? Many things can damage nerves and lead to peripheral nerve disorders: Diabetes is the most common cause of peripheral nerve disorders. Most people with diabetes will develop diabetic nerve problems . Physical injury ( trauma ) that stretches, crushes, squeezes, cuts, or puts pressure on one or more nerves. Some examples of peripheral nerve disorders from physical injury include complex regional pain syndrome and brachial plexus injuries . Health conditions , including: Certain cancers and their treatment ( chemotherapy and radiation therapy ). Infections , such as HIV and Lyme disease . Problems with blood or blood vessels . Autoimmune diseases , such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus . Kidney or liver disease . Certain medicines. Contact with certain toxic substances , such as lead or mercury . Alcohol use disorder (AUD) and smoking . Vitamin imbalances , especially a lack of vitamin B12 . Your genes , including changes in your genes or conditions that you inherit from your parents, such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease . In certain cases, the cause of peripheral nerve disorder is not known. What are the symptoms of peripheral nerve disorders? The symptoms of peripheral nerve disorders depend on which nerves are affected, what is causing the damage, and how serious it is: Types of nerves Possible symptoms of nerve damage Motor nerves control your muscles and all your movement, such as walking, talking, and using your hands. Weak or aching muscles Problems with balance, walking, or using your arms and hands Cramps or twitching muscles Muscle shrinking Sensory nerves carry messages to your brain from your senses, including touch, hot and cold, and pain. Tingling, numbness, or pain often in the hands and feet Not being able to feel heat, cold, or pain, such as a cut on your foot Pain from even light touch Autonomic nerves send messages to your organs to control breathing, digestion, and other body functions that happen without thinking about them. A heartbeat that's too fast or too slow Trouble swallowing Sweating too much or too little Vomiting , diarrhea , or constipation Problems with urination or sexual function Symptoms may range from mild to very strong. They may develop quickly over days or slowly over months and years. But they are rarely life-threatening. How are peripheral nerve disorders diagnosed? To find out if you have a peripheral nerve disorder, your provider will: Ask about your medical history Ask about your family health history Do a physical exam Order tests, which may include: Blood tests Genetic tests Nerve tests that measure: Electrical activity in your nerves and muscles How well your autonomic nerves are working A biopsy of nerve or skin tissue CT or MRI scan to see what may be pressing on your nerves What are the treatments for peripheral nerve disorders? It's important to treat any conditions that are causing nerve damage. In certain cases, that will allow your nerves to heal over time. Treatment for symptoms depends on the type of peripheral nerve disorder you have, where it is, and how severe. Treatment options include: Braces or splints Over-the-counter patches and skin creams Prescription medicines Non-drug pain management , such as electrical stimulation or relaxation therapy Surgery to relieve pressure on a nerve Can peripheral nerve disorders be prevented? You can help prevent peripheral nerve disorders by: Managing health conditions that may cause nerve damage, especially diabetes Preventing falls and accidents Avoiding toxic substances Being careful to avoid repeated motions and body positions that press on your nerves Eating a balanced diet , exercising , limiting alcohol , and not smoking NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)? Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a rare brain disease . It happens because of damage to nerve cells in the brain. PSP affects your movement , including control of your walking and balance . It also affects your thinking and eye movement . PSP is progressive, which means that it gets worse over time. What causes progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)? The cause of PSP is unknown. In rare cases, the cause is a mutation in a certain gene. One sign of PSP is abnormal clumps of tau in nerve cells in the brain. Tau is a protein in your nervous system, including in nerve cells. Some other diseases also cause a buildup of tau in the brain, including Alzheimer's disease . Who is at risk for progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)? PSP usually affects people over 60, but in some cases it can start earlier. It is more common in men. What are the symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)? Symptoms are very different in each person, but they may include: A loss of balance while walking. This is often the first symptom. Speech problems Trouble swallowing A blurring of vision and problems controlling eye movement Changes in mood and behavior, including depression and apathy (a loss of interest and enthusiasm) Mild dementia How is progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP0 diagnosed? There is no specific test for PSP. It can be difficult to diagnose, because the symptoms are similar to other diseases such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will take your medical history and do physical and neurological exams. You may have an MRI or other imaging tests. What are the treatments for progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)? There is currently no effective treatment for PSP. Medicines may reduce some symptoms. Some non-drug treatments, such as walking aids and special glasses, may also help. People with severe swallowing problems may need gastrostomy. This is a surgery to insert a feeding tube into the stomach. PSP gets worse over time. Many people become severely disabled within three to five years after getting it. PSP isn't life-threatening on its own. It can still be be dangerous, because it increases your risk of pneumonia , choking from swallowing problems, and injuries from falling . But with good attention to medical and nutritional needs, many people with PSP can live 10 or more years after the first symptoms of the disease. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Sciatica is a symptom of a problem with the sciatic nerve, the largest nerve in the body. It controls muscles in the back of your knee and lower leg and provides feeling to the back of your thigh, part of your lower leg, and the sole of your foot. When you have sciatica, you have pain, weakness, numbness, or tingling. It can start in the lower back and extend down your leg to your calf, foot, or even your toes. It's usually on only one side of your body. Causes of sciatica include: A ruptured intervertebral disk Narrowing of the spinal canal that puts pressure on the nerve, called spinal stenosis An injury such as a pelvic fracture. In many cases no cause can be found. Sometimes sciatica goes away on its own. Treatment, if needed, depends on the cause of the problem. It may include exercises, medicines, and surgery.

Seizures are symptoms of a brain problem. They happen because of sudden, abnormal 
electrical activity in the brain. When people think of seizures, they often think of convulsions in which a person's body 
shakes rapidly and uncontrollably. Not all seizures cause convulsions. There are many types 
of seizures and some have mild symptoms. Seizures fall into two main groups. Focal 
seizures, also called partial seizures, happen in just one part of the brain. Generalized 
seizures are a result of abnormal activity on both sides of the brain. Most seizures last from 30 seconds to 2 minutes and do not cause lasting harm. However, 
it is a medical emergency if seizures last longer than 5 minutes or if a person has many 
seizures and does not wake up between them. Seizures can have many causes, including 
medicines, high fevers, head injuries and certain diseases.  People who have recurring 
seizures due to a brain disorder have epilepsy . NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Many disorders can affect our ability to speak and communicate. They range from saying sounds incorrectly to being completely unable to speak or understand speech.  Causes include: Hearing disorders and deafness Voice problems , such as dysphonia or those caused by cleft lip or palate Speech problems like stuttering Developmental disabilities Learning disabilities Autism spectrum disorder Brain injury Stroke Some speech and communication problems may be genetic. Often, no one knows the causes. By first grade, about 5% of children have noticeable speech disorders. Speech and language therapy can help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Children vary in their development of speech and language skills. Health care professionals have lists of milestones for what's normal. These milestones help figure out whether a child is on track or if he or she may need extra help.  For example, a child usually has one or two words like "Hi," "dog," "Dada," or "Mama" by her first birthday. Sometimes a delay may be caused by hearing loss . Other times it may be due to a speech or language disorder. Children who have speech disorders may have trouble making speech sounds correctly. They may hesitate or stutter when talking. Children with language disorders might have trouble understanding what others say or difficulty sharing their thoughts. If you have concerns about your child's speech or language development, talk to your child's health care provider. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Spina bifida is a neural tube defect - a type of birth defect of the brain, spine, or spinal cord. It happens if the spinal column of the fetus doesn't close completely during the first month of pregnancy. This can damage the nerves and spinal cord. Screening tests during pregnancy can check for spina bifida. Sometimes it is discovered only after the baby is born. The symptoms of spina bifida vary from person to person. Most people with spina bifida are of normal intelligence. Some people need assistive devices such as braces, crutches, or wheelchairs. They may have learning difficulties, urinary and bowel problems, or hydrocephalus , a buildup of fluid in the brain. The exact cause of spina bifida is unknown. It seems to run in families. Taking folic acid can reduce the risk of having a baby with spina bifida. It's in most multivitamins. Women who could become pregnant should take it daily. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Your spinal cord is a bundle of nerves that runs down the middle of your back. It carries signals back and forth between your body and your brain. It is protected by your vertebrae, which are the bone disks that make up your spine. If you have an accident that damages the vertebrae or other parts of the spine, this can also injure the spinal cord. Other spinal cord problems include: Tumors Infections such as meningitis and polio Inflammatory diseases Autoimmune diseases Degenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy Symptoms vary but might include pain, numbness, loss of sensation and muscle weakness. These symptoms can occur around the spinal cord, and also in other areas such as your arms and legs. Treatments often include medicines and surgery.

Your spinal cord is a bundle of nerves that runs down the middle of your back. It carries signals back and forth between your body and your brain. A spinal cord injury disrupts the signals. Spinal cord injuries usually begin with a blow that fractures (breaks) or dislocates your vertebrae, the bone disks that make up your spine. Most injuries don't cut through your spinal cord. Instead, they cause damage when pieces of vertebrae tear into cord tissue or press down on the nerve parts that carry signals. Spinal cord injuries can be complete or incomplete. With a complete spinal cord injury, the cord can't send signals below the level of the injury. As a result, you are paralyzed below the injury. With an incomplete injury, you have some movement and sensation below the injury. A spinal cord injury is a medical emergency. Immediate treatment can reduce long-term effects. Treatments may include medicines, braces or traction to stabilize the spine, and surgery. Later treatment usually includes medicines and rehabilitation therapy. Mobility aids and assistive devices may help you to get around and do some daily tasks. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)? Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a group of genetic diseases that damages and kills motor neurons. Motor neurons are a type of nerve cell in the spinal cord and lower part of the brain. They control movement in your arms, legs, face, chest, throat, and tongue. As the motor neurons die off, your muscles start to weaken and atrophy (waste away). The muscle damage gets worse over time and can affect speaking, walking, swallowing, and breathing. What are the types of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and what are their symptoms? There are different types of SMA. They are based on how serious the disease is and when the symptoms start: Type l is also called Werdnig-Hoffman disease or infantile-onset SMA. It is the most severe type. It is also the most common. Babies with this type usually show signs of the disease before 6 months of age. In more severe cases, the signs show up even before or just after birth (Types 0 or 1A). The babies may have trouble swallowing and breathing and may not move around a lot. They have chronic shortening of muscles or tendons (called contractures). They usually cannot sit up without help. Without treatment, many children with this type will die before 2 years of age. Type ll is a moderate to severe type of SMA. It usually first noticed between 6 and 18 months of age. Most children with this type can sit without support but cannot stand or walk without help. They may also have trouble breathing. They can usually live into adolescence or young adulthood. Type lll is also called Kugelberg-Welander disease. It is the mildest type that affects children. The signs of the disease usually show up after age 18 months. Children with this type can walk by themselves but may have trouble running, getting up from a chair, or climbing stairs. They may also have scoliosis (curvature of the spine), contractures, and respiratory infections. With treatment, most children with this type will have a normal lifespan. Type IV is rare and often mild. It usually causes symptoms after 21 years of age. The symptoms include mild to moderate leg muscle weakness, tremors , and mild breathing problems. The symptoms slowly get worse over time. People with this type of SMA have a normal lifespan. What causes spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)? Most types of SMA are caused by a change in the SMN1 gene . This gene is responsible for making a protein that the motor neurons need to be healthy and to function. But when part of the SMN1 gene is missing or abnormal, there isn't enough protein for the motor neurons. This causes the motor neurons to die off. Most people have two copies of the SM1 gene - one from each parent. SMA normally only happens when both copies have the gene change. If only one copy has the change, there usually aren't any symptoms. But that gene could be passed down from parent to child. Some of the less common types of SMA may be caused by changes in other genes. How is spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose SMA: A physical exam A medical history, including asking about family history Genetic testing to check for the gene changes that cause SMA Electromyography and nerve conduction studies and a muscle biopsy may be done, especially if no gene changes were found Parents who have a family history of SMA may want to do a prenatal test to check to see whether their baby has an SMN1 gene change. An amniocentesis or in some cases a chorionic villi sampling (CVS) is used to get the sample for testing. In some states, genetic testing for SMA is part of newborn screening tests . What are the treatments for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)? There is no cure for SMA. Treatments can help manage symptoms and prevent complications. They may include: Medicines to help the body make more of the proteins that the motor neurons need Gene therapy for children under 2 years of age Physical, occupational, and rehabilitation therapy to help to improve posture and the mobility of the joints. These therapies may also improve blood flow and slow muscle weakness and atrophy. Some people may also need therapy for trouble speaking , chewing, and swallowing. Assistive devices such as supports or braces, orthotics, speech synthesizers, and wheelchairs to help people stay more independent Good nutrition and a balanced diet to help maintain weight and strength. Some people might need a feeding tube in order to get the nutrition they need. Breathing support for people who have muscle weakness in the neck, throat, and chest. The support may include devices to help with breathing during the day and to prevent sleep apnea at night. Some people might need to be on a ventilator. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is a stroke? A stroke happens when there is a loss of blood flow to part of the brain. Your brain cells cannot get the oxygen and nutrients they need from blood, and they start to die within a few minutes. This can cause lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death. If you think that you or someone else is having a stroke, call 911 right away. Immediate treatment may save someone's life and increase the chances for successful rehabilitation and recovery. What are the types of stroke? There are two types of stroke: Ischemic stroke is caused by a blood clot that blocks or plugs a blood vessel in the brain. This is the most common type; about 80% of strokes are ischemic. Hemorrhagic stroke is caused by a blood vessel that breaks and bleeds into the brain Another condition that's similar to a stroke is a transient ischemic attack (TIA). It's sometimes called a "mini-stroke." TIAs happen when the blood supply to the brain is blocked for a short time. The damage to the brain cells isn't permanent, but if you have had a TIA, you are at a much higher risk of having a stroke. Who is at risk for a stroke? Certain factors can raise your risk of a stroke. The major risk factors include: High blood pressure . This is the primary risk factor for a stroke. Diabetes . Heart diseases . Atrial fibrillation and other heart diseases can cause blood clots that lead to stroke. Smoking . When you smoke, you damage your blood vessels and raise your blood pressure. A personal or family history of stroke or TIA. Age. Your risk of stroke increases as you get older. Race and ethnicity. African Americans have a higher risk of stroke. There are also other factors that are linked to a higher risk of stroke, such as: Alcohol and illegal drug use Not getting enough physical activity High cholesterol Unhealthy diet Having obesity What are the symptoms of stroke? The symptoms of stroke often happen quickly. They include: Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm, or leg (especially on one side of the body) Sudden confusion, trouble speaking, or understanding speech Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes Sudden difficulty walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination Sudden severe headache with no known cause If you think that you or someone else is having a stroke, call 911 right away. How are strokes diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will: Ask about your symptoms and medical history Do a physical exam, including a check of Your mental alertness Your coordination and balance Any numbness or weakness in your face, arms, and legs Any trouble speaking and seeing clearly Run some tests, which may include Diagnostic imaging of the brain, such as a CT scan or MRI Heart tests , which can help detect heart problems or blood clots that may have led to a stroke. Possible tests include an electrocardiogram (EKG) and an echocardiography. What are the treatments for stroke? Treatments for stroke include medicines, surgery, and rehabilitation. Which treatments you get depend on the type of stroke and the stage of treatment. The different stages are: Acute treatment , to try to stop a stroke while it is happening Post-stroke rehabilitation , to overcome the disabilities caused by the stroke Prevention , to prevent a first stroke or, if you have already had one, prevent another stroke Acute treatments for ischemic stroke are usually medicines: You may get tPA, (tissue plasminogen activator), a medicine to dissolve the blood clot. You can only get this medicine within 4 hours of when your symptoms started. The sooner you can get it, the better your chance of recovery. If you cannot get that medicine, you may get medicine that helps stop platelets from clumping together to form blood clots. Or you may get a blood thinner to keep existing clots from getting bigger. If you have carotid artery disease, you may also need a procedure to open your blocked carotid artery Acute treatments for hemorrhagic stroke focus on stopping the bleeding. The first step is to find the cause of bleeding in the brain. The next step is to control it: If high blood pressure is the cause of bleeding, you may be given blood pressure medicines . If an aneurysm if the cause, you may need aneurysm clipping or coil embolization. These are surgeries to prevent further leaking of blood from the aneurysm. It also can help prevent the aneurysm from bursting again. If an arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is the cause of a stroke, you may need an AVM repair. An AVM is a tangle of faulty arteries and veins that can rupture within the brain. An AVM repair may be done through Surgery Injecting a substance into the blood vessels of the AVM to block blood flow Radiation to shrink the blood vessels of the AVM Stroke rehabilitation can help you relearn skills you lost because of the damage. The goal is to help you become as independent as possible and to have the best possible quality of life. Prevention of another stroke is also important, since having a stroke increases the risk of getting another one. Prevention may include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines. Can strokes be prevented? If you have already had a stroke or are at risk of having a stroke, you can make some heart-healthy lifestyle changes to try to prevent a future stroke: Eating a heart-healthy diet Aiming for a healthy weight Managing stress Getting regular physical activity Quitting smoking Managing your blood pressure and cholesterol levels If these changes aren't enough, you may need medicine to control your risk factors. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Syringomyelia is a rare disorder that causes a cyst to form in your spinal cord . This cyst, called a syrinx, gets bigger and longer over time, destroying part of the spinal cord.  Damage to the spinal cord from the syrinx can cause symptoms such as : Pain and weakness in the back, shoulders, arms or legs Headaches Inability to feel hot or cold Symptoms vary according to the size and location of the syrinx. They often begin in early adulthood. Syringomyelia usually results from a skull abnormality called a Chiari I malformation . A tumor, meningitis or physical trauma can also cause it. Surgery is the main treatment. Some people also need to have the syrinx drained. Medicines can help ease pain. In some cases, there are no symptoms, so you may not need treatment.

If you have Tourette syndrome, you make unusual movements or sounds, called tics. You have little or no control over them. Common tics are throat-clearing and blinking. You may repeat words, spin, or, rarely, blurt out swear words. Tourette syndrome is a disorder of the nervous system. It often occurs with other problems, such as: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) Anxiety Depression The cause of Tourette syndrome is unknown. It is more common in boys than girls. The tics usually start in childhood and may be worst in the early teens.  Many people eventually outgrow them. No treatment is needed unless the tics interfere with everyday life. Excitement or worry can make tics worse. Calm, focused activities may make them better. Medicines and talk therapy may also help. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is a stroke that lasts only a few minutes. It happens when the blood supply to part of the brain is briefly blocked. Symptoms of a TIA are like other stroke symptoms, but do not last as long. They happen suddenly, and include: Numbness or weakness, especially on one side of the body Confusion or trouble speaking or understanding speech Trouble seeing in one or both eyes Difficulty walking Dizziness Loss of balance or coordination Most symptoms of a TIA disappear within an hour, although they may last for up to 24 hours. Because you cannot tell if these symptoms are from a TIA or a stroke, you should go to the hospital right away. TIAs are often a warning sign for future strokes . Taking medicine, such as blood thinners , may reduce your risk of a stroke. Your doctor might also recommend surgery. You can also help lower your risk by having a healthy lifestyle . This includes not smoking, not drinking too much, eating a healthy diet, and exercising. It is also important to control other health problems, such as high blood pressure and cholesterol . NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is traumatic brain injury (TBI)? Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a sudden injury that causes damage to the brain. It may happen when there is a blow, bump, or jolt to the head. This is a closed head injury. A TBI can also happen when an object penetrates the skull. This is a penetrating injury. Symptoms of a TBI can be mild, moderate, or severe. Concussions are a type of mild TBI. The effects of a concussion can sometimes be serious, but most people completely recover in time. More severe TBI can lead to serious physical and psychological symptoms, coma , and even death. What causes traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The main causes of TBI depend on the type of head injury : Some of the common causes of a closed head injury include Falls . This is the most common cause in adults age 65 and older. Motor vehicle crashes. This is the most common cause in young adults. Sports injuries Being struck by an object Child abuse . This is the most common cause in children under age 4. Blast injuries due to explosions Some of the common causes of a penetrating injury include Being hit by a bullet or shrapnel Being hit by a weapon such as a hammer, knife, or baseball bat A head injury that causes a bone fragment to penetrate the skull Some accidents such as explosions, natural disasters, or other extreme events can cause both closed and penetrating TBI in the same person. Who is at risk for traumatic brain injury (TBI)? Certain groups are at higher risk of TBI: Men are more likely to get a TBI than women. They are also more likely to have serious TBI. Adults aged 65 and older are at the greatest risk for being hospitalized and dying from a TBI What are the symptoms of traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The symptoms of TBI depend on the type of injury and how serious the brain damage is. The symptoms of mild TBI can include: A brief loss of consciousness in some cases. However, many people with mild TBI remain conscious after the injury. Headache Confusion Lightheadedness Dizziness Blurred vision or tired eyes Ringing in the ears Bad taste in the mouth Fatigue or lethargy A change in sleep patterns Behavioral or mood changes Trouble with memory, concentration, attention, or thinking If you have a moderate or severe TBI, you may have those same symptoms. You may also have other symptoms such as: A headache that gets worse or does not go away Repeated vomiting or nausea Convulsions or seizures Not being able to wake up from sleep Larger than normal pupil (dark center) of one or both eyes. This is called dilation of the pupil. Slurred speech Weakness or numbness in the arms and legs Loss of coordination Increased confusion, restlessness, or agitation How is traumatic brain injury (TBI) diagnosed? If you have a head injury or other trauma that may have caused a TBI, you need to get medical care as soon as possible. To make a diagnosis, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and the details of your injury Will do a neurologic exam May do imaging tests , such as a CT scan or MRI May use a tool such as the Glasgow coma scale to determine how severe the TBI is. This scale measures your ability to open your eyes, speak, and move. May do neuropsychological tests to check how your brain is functioning What are the treatments for traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The treatments for TBI depend on many factors, including the size, severity, and location of the brain injury. For mild TBI , the main treatment is rest. If you have a headache, you can try taking over-the-counter pain relievers . It is important to follow your health care provider's instructions for complete rest and a gradual return to your normal activities. If you start doing too much too soon, it may take longer to recover. Contact your provider if your symptoms are not getting better or if you have new symptoms. For moderate to severe TBI , the first thing health care providers will do is stabilize you to prevent further injury. They will manage your blood pressure, check the pressure inside your skull, and make sure that there is enough blood and oxygen getting to your brain. Once you are stable, the treatments may include: Surgery to reduce additional damage to your brain, for example to Remove hematomas (clotted blood) Get rid of damaged or dead brain tissue Repair skull fractures Relieve pressure in the skull Medicines to treat the symptoms of TBI and to lower some of the risks associated with it, such as Anti-anxiety medication to lessen feelings of nervousness and fear Anticoagulants to prevent blood clots Anticonvulsants to prevent seizures Antidepressants to treat symptoms of depression and mood instability Muscle relaxants to reduce muscle spasms Stimulants to increase alertness and attention Rehabilitation therapies , which can include therapies for physical, emotional, and cognitive difficulties: Physical therapy, to build physical strength, coordination, and flexibility Occupational therapy, to help you learn or relearn how to perform daily tasks, such as getting dressed, cooking, and bathing Speech therapy, to help you to with speech and other communication skills and treat swallowing disorders Psychological counseling, to help you learn coping skills, work on relationships, and improve your emotional well-being Vocational counseling, which focuses on your ability to return to work and deal with workplace challenges Cognitive therapy, to improve your memory, attention, perception, learning, planning, and judgment Some people with TBI may have permanent disabilities . A TBI can also put you at risk for other health problems such as anxiety , depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder . Treating these problems can improve your quality of life. Can traumatic brain injury (TBI) be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent head injuries and TBIs: Always wear your seatbelt and use car seats and booster seats for children Never drive under the influence of drugs or alcohol Wear a properly fitting helmet when riding a bicycle, skateboarding, and playing sports like hockey and football Prevent falls by Making your house safer. For example, you can install railings on the stairs and grab bars in the tub, get rid of tripping hazards, and use window guards and stair safety gates for young children. Improving your balance and strength with regular physical activity

Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is a type of chronic pain that affects your face. It causes extreme, sudden burning or shock-like pain. It usually affects one side of the face. Any vibration on your face, even from talking, can set it off. The condition may come and go, disappearing for days or even months. But the longer you have it, the less often it goes away. TN usually affects people over 50, especially women. The cause is probably a blood vessel pressing on the trigeminal nerve, one of the largest nerves in the head. Tumors and multiple sclerosis can also cause TN, but in some cases the cause is unknown. There is no specific test for TN. It can be hard to diagnose, since many other conditions can cause facial pain. Treatment options include medicines, surgery, and complementary techniques. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Your abdomen extends from below your chest to your groin. Some people call it the stomach, but your abdomen contains many other important organs. Pain in the abdomen can come from any one of them. The pain may start somewhere else, such as your chest. Severe pain doesn't always mean a serious problem. Nor does mild pain mean a problem is not serious. Call your health care provider if mild pain lasts a week or more or if you have pain with other symptoms. Get medical help immediately if: You have abdominal pain that is sudden and sharp You also have pain in your chest, neck or shoulder You're vomiting blood or have blood in your stool Your abdomen is stiff, hard and tender to touch You can't move your bowels, especially if you're also vomiting

Adhesions are bands of scar-like tissue. Normally, internal tissues and organs have slippery surfaces so they can shift easily as the body moves. Adhesions cause tissues and organs to stick together. They might connect the loops of the intestines to each other, to nearby organs, or to the wall of the abdomen. They can pull sections of the intestines out of place. This may block food from passing through the intestine. Adhesions can occur anywhere in the body. But they often form after surgery on the abdomen. Almost everyone who has surgery on the abdomen gets adhesions. Some adhesions don't cause any problems. But when they partly or completely block the intestines , they cause symptoms such as: Severe abdominal pain or cramping Vomiting Bloating An inability to pass gas Constipation Adhesions can sometimes cause infertility in women by preventing fertilized eggs from reaching the uterus. No tests are available to detect adhesions.  Doctors usually find them during surgery to diagnose other problems. Some adhesions go away by themselves. If they partly block your intestines, a diet low in fiber can allow food to move easily through the affected area. If you have a complete intestinal obstruction, it is life-threatening. You should get immediate medical attention and may need surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

The appendix is a small, tube-like organ attached to the first part of the large intestine. It is located in the lower right part of the abdomen. It has no known function. A blockage inside of the appendix causes appendicitis. The blockage leads to increased pressure, problems with blood flow, and inflammation. If the blockage is not treated, the appendix can burst and spread infection into the abdomen. This causes a condition called peritonitis . The main symptom is pain in the abdomen, often on the right side.  It is usually sudden and gets worse over time.  Other symptoms may include: Swelling in the abdomen Loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting Constipation or diarrhea Inability to pass gas Low fever Not everyone with appendicitis has all these symptoms. Appendicitis is a medical emergency. Treatment almost always involves removing the appendix. Anyone can get appendicitis, but it is more common among people 10 to 30 years old. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your liver makes a digestive juice called bile. Your gallbladder stores it between meals. When you eat, your gallbladder pushes the bile into tubes called bile ducts . They carry the bile to your small intestine. The bile helps break down fat. It also helps the liver get rid of toxins and wastes. Bile duct cancer is rare. It can happen in the parts of the bile ducts that are outside or inside the liver. Cancer of the bile duct outside of the liver is much more common. Risk factors include having inflammation of the bile duct, ulcerative colitis , and some liver diseases. Symptoms can include: Jaundice Itchy skin Fever Abdominal pain Tests to diagnose bile duct cancer may include a physical exam, imaging tests of the liver and bile ducts, blood tests, and a biopsy. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your liver makes a digestive juice called bile. Your gallbladder stores it between meals. When you eat, your gallbladder pushes the bile into tubes called bile ducts. They carry the bile to your small intestine. The bile helps break down fat. It also helps the liver get rid of toxins and wastes. Different diseases can block the bile ducts and cause a problem with the flow of bile: Gallstones , which can increase pressure in the gallbladder and cause a gallbladder attack. The pain usually lasts from one to several hours. Cancer Infections Birth defects, such as biliary atresia.  It is the most common reason for liver transplants in children in the United States. Inflammation, which can cause scarring. Over time, this can lead to liver failure. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Bowel incontinence is the inability to control your bowels. When you feel the urge to have a bowel movement , you may not be able to hold it until you get to a toilet. Millions of Americans have this problem. It affects people of all ages - children and adults. It is more common in women and older adults. It is not a normal part of aging. Causes include: Constipation Damage to muscles or nerves of the anus and rectum Diarrhea Pelvic floor disorders Treatments include changes in diet, medicines, bowel training, or surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A bowel movement is the last stop in the movement of food through your digestive tract. Your stool passes out of your body through the rectum and anus.  Another name for stool is feces.  It is made of what is left after your digestive system (stomach, small intestine, and colon) absorbs nutrients and fluids from what you eat and drink. Sometimes a bowel movement isn't normal. Diarrhea happens when stool passes through the large intestine too quickly. Constipation occurs when stool passes through the large intestine too slowly. Bowel incontinence is a problem controlling your bowel movements. Other abnormalities with bowel movements may be a sign of a digestive problem. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is C. diff ? C. diff is a bacterium that can cause diarrhea and more serious intestinal conditions such as colitis. You may see it called other names, such as Clostridioides difficile (the new name), Clostridium difficile (an older name), and C. diff icile. It causes close to half a million illnesses each year. What causes C. diff infections? C. diff bacteria are commonly found in the environment, but people usually only get C. diff infections when they are taking antibiotics . That's because antibiotics not only wipe out bad germs, but they also kill the good germs that protect your body against infections. The effect of antibiotics can last as long as several months. If you come in contact with C. diff germs during this time, you can get sick. You are more likely to get a C. diff infection if you take antibiotics for more than a week. C. diff spreads when people touch food, surfaces, or objects that are contaminated with feces (poop) from a person who has C. diff . Who is more likely to get a C. diff infection? You are at more likely to get a C. diff infection if you: Are taking antibiotics Are 65 or older Recently stayed in a hospital or nursing home Have a weakened immune system Have had a previous infection with C. diff or were exposed to it What are the symptoms of C. diff infections? The symptoms of C. diff infections include: Diarrhea (loose, watery stools) or frequent bowel movements for several days Fever Stomach tenderness or pain Loss of appetite Nausea Severe diarrhea causes you to lose a lot of fluids. This can put you at risk for dehydration . How are C. diff infections diagnosed? If you have been taking antibiotics recently and have symptoms of a C. diff infection, you should see your health care provider. Your provider will ask about your symptoms and do a lab test of your stool . In some cases, you might also need an imaging test such as an x-ray or CT scan to check for complications. What are the treatments for C. diff infections? Certain antibiotics can treat C. diff infections. If you were already taking a different antibiotic when you got C. diff , your provider may ask you to stop taking that one. If you have a severe case, you may need to stay in the hospital. If you have very severe pain or serious complications, you may need surgery to remove the diseased part of your colon. About 1 in 6 people who have had a C. diff infection will get it again within the following 2 to 8 weeks. This is called recurrent C. diff . It could be that your original infection came back or that you have a new infection. Contact your provider if your symptoms come back. For people who keep getting C. diff infections, treatments such as fecal microbiota transplants (FMT) have shown promising results. FMT uses stool (or bacteria from stool) from a healthy donor to try to restore the balance of healthy bacteria in your intestines. Can C. diff infections be prevented? There are steps you can take to try to prevent getting or spreading C. diff : Wash your hands with soap and water after you use the bathroom and before you eat. If you have diarrhea, clean the bathroom that you used before anyone else uses it. Use bleach mixed with water or another disinfectant to clean the toilet seat, handle, and lid. Health care providers can also help prevent C. diff infections by taking infection control precautions and improving how they prescribe antibiotics. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is celiac disease? Celiac disease is a chronic (long-term) digestive and immune disorder that damages your small intestine. The damage may prevent your body from absorbing vitamins , minerals , and other nutrients from the food you eat. This can lead to malnutrition and other serious health problems Celiac disease is triggered by eating foods that contain gluten. Gluten is a protein found in wheat, barley, rye, and other grains. It may also be in other products like vitamins and supplements , hair and skin products, toothpastes, and lip balm. Celiac disease is different from gluten sensitivity . Both involve problems with gluten and can cause some of the same symptoms, such as abdominal (belly) pain and fatigue . But gluten sensitivity does not damage the small intestine like celiac disease does. Wheat allergy, a type of food allergy , is also different. With both celiac disease and wheat allergy, your immune system is reacting to wheat. But with wheat allergy, you can have some different symptoms, such as itchy eyes or trouble breathing . And a wheat allergy will not cause long-term damage to the small intestine. What causes celiac disease? The exact cause of celiac disease is not known. Research suggests that celiac disease only happens in people who have certain genes and eat food that contains gluten. Researchers are studying other factors that may play a role in causing the disease. Who is more likely to develop celiac disease? Celiac disease is more common if you: Have a family member who has the disease Have Down syndrome , Turner syndrome , or Williams syndrome Are White Are female What are the symptoms of celiac disease? The symptoms of celiac disease can be different from person to person. Sometimes the symptoms may come and go. Some people may not notice any symptoms. Some of the possible symptoms affect your digestive system. Digestive symptoms are more common in children than in adults. The digestive symptoms include: Bloating (feeling fullness or swelling in your belly) Chronic (long-term) diarrhea or greasy, bulky, unusually bad-smelling stool (poop) Constipation Gas Lactose intolerance because of damage to the small intestine Nausea and vomiting Pain in the abdomen (belly) Weight loss in adults, or not enough weight gain in children Some people with celiac disease have symptoms that affect other parts of the body, such as: Fatigue Depression and anxiety Irritability (in children) Dermatitis herpetiformis, an itchy rash with blisters (mainly in adults) Bone or joint pain Symptoms involving the mouth, such as canker sores or dry mouth What other problems can celiac disease cause? Over time, celiac disease can cause other health problems, especially if it is not treated. These problems can include: Malnutrition Anemia , especially iron-deficiency anemia Bone loss Nervous system problems such as headaches , balance problems , or peripheral neuropathy Reproductive problems, such as missed menstrual periods and miscarriages in women and infertility in men and women How is celiac disease diagnosed? If you have symptoms of celiac disease, your health care provider will look for signs that you might have celiac disease. To do this, your provider will get your medical and family history and do a physical exam. If your provider thinks that you could have celiac disease, you will have some tests. Providers most often use blood tests and biopsies of the small intestine to diagnose celiac disease. The biopsy would be done during an upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy. For this procedure, your provider uses an endoscope (a flexible tube with a camera) to see the lining of your esophagus, stomach, and small intestine. It also allows your provider to take a sample of tissue for a biopsy. What are the treatments for celiac disease? The treatment for celiac disease is following a gluten-free diet for the rest of your life. Sticking with a gluten-free diet will treat or prevent many of the symptoms and other health problems caused by celiac disease. In most cases, it can also heal damage in the small intestine and prevent more damage. Your provider may refer you to a registered dietician (a nutrition expert) who can help you learn how to eat a healthy diet without gluten. You will also need to avoid all hidden sources of gluten, such as certain supplements, cosmetics, toothpaste, etc. Reading product labels can sometimes help you avoid gluten. If a label doesn't tell you what is in a product, check with the company that makes the product for an ingredients list. Don't just assume that a product is gluten-free if it doesn't mention it. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver. Scar tissue forms because of injury or long-term disease. Scar tissue cannot do what healthy liver tissue does - make protein, help fight infections, clean the blood, help digest food and store energy.   Cirrhosis can lead to  : Easy bruising or bleeding, or nosebleeds Swelling of the abdomen or legs Extra sensitivity to medicines High blood pressure in the vein entering the liver Enlarged veins called varices in the esophagus and stomach. Varices can bleed suddenly. Kidney failure Jaundice Severe itching Gallstones A small number of people with cirrhosis get liver cancer . Your doctor will diagnose cirrhosis with blood tests, imaging tests, or a biopsy. Cirrhosis has many causes. In the United States, the most common causes are chronic alcoholism and hepatitis . Nothing will make the scar tissue disappear, but treating the cause can keep it from getting worse. If too much scar tissue forms, you may need to consider a liver transplant . NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your colon, also known as the large intestine, is part of your digestive system. It's a long, hollow tube at the end of your digestive tract where your body makes and stores stool. Many disorders affect the colon's ability to work properly. Some of these include: Colorectal cancer Colonic polyps - extra tissue growing in the colon that can become cancerous Ulcerative colitis - ulcers of the colon and rectum Diverticulitis - inflammation or infection of pouches in the colon Irritable bowel syndrome -  an uncomfortable condition causing abdominal cramping and other symptoms Treatment for colonic diseases varies greatly depending on the disease and its severity. Treatment may involve diet, medicines and in some cases, surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A polyp is an extra piece of tissue that grows inside your body. Colonic polyps grow in the large intestine, or colon.  Most polyps are not dangerous. However, some polyps may turn into cancer or already be cancer. To be safe, doctors remove polyps and test them.  Polyps can be removed when a doctor examines the inside of the large intestine during a colonoscopy . Anyone can get polyps, but certain people are more likely than others. You may have a greater chance of getting polyps if you : Are over age 50 Have had polyps before Have a family member with polyps Have a family history of colon cancer Most colon polyps do not cause symptoms. If you have symptoms, they may include blood on your underwear or on toilet paper after a bowel movement, blood in your stool, or constipation or diarrhea lasting more than a week. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is colorectal cancer? Colorectal cancer is cancer that develops in the tissues of the colon or rectum. Your colon and rectum are part of your digestive system: Your colon is the first and longest part of your large intestine. It absorbs water and some nutrients from foods. It also changes the leftover waste products into stool (poop). Your rectum is the lower part of your large intestine. It's where your body stores stool. Cancer that begins in the colon is called colon cancer, and cancer that begins in the rectum is called rectal cancer. Cancer that affects either of these parts may also be called colorectal cancer. What causes colorectal cancer? Colorectal cancer happens when there are changes in your genetic material (DNA) . These changes are also called mutations or variants. Often, the genetic changes that lead to colorectal cancer happen during your lifetime and the exact cause is unknown. But certain genetic changes that raise your risk for colorectal cancer are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Besides genetics, other factors, including your lifestyle and the environment, can affect your risk of colorectal cancer. Who is more likely to develop colorectal cancer? Anyone can get colorectal cancer, but certain factors make you more likely to develop it: Being older; your risk of getting colorectal cancer increases as you age. Having a personal or family history of colorectal cancer. Having a history of adenomas. Adenomas are colorectal polyps (growths) that look abnormal under a microscope or are 1 centimeter or larger. Adenomas are not cancer, but they can sometimes turn into cancer over time. Having a genetic syndrome such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or Lynch syndrome (hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer). Having chronic ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease for 8 years or more. Having three or more alcoholic drinks per day. Smoking cigarettes . Being Black; Black people have an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer compared to other races. Having obesity . What are the symptoms of colorectal cancer? Colorectal cancer may not always cause symptoms, especially at first. If you do have symptoms, they could include: A change in bowel habits that lasts more than a few days, such as: Diarrhea Constipation Feeling that the bowel does not empty completely Your stool is narrower or has a different shape than usual Blood (either bright red or very dark) in the stool Frequent gas pains, bloating, fullness, or cramps Weight loss for no known reason Fatigue What is screening for colorectal cancer and who needs it? Because colorectal cancer may not cause symptoms at first, it's important to have screening tests for colorectal cancer . Screening tests look for signs of a disease before you have any symptoms. They can help find cancer early, when it may be easier to treat. Most experts recommend that start screenings at 45 and continue until at least age 75. People over 75 and those who are at high risk should talk to their providers about how often you need screening and what type of test they should get. The types of tests include different stool tests and procedures such as colonoscopies and flexible sigmoidoscopy. Talk with your provider about how often you need screening and what type of test you should get. How is colorectal cancer diagnosed? If you have symptoms that could be caused by colorectal cancer or if your screening test results are abnormal, you may need to have more tests to find out if you have cancer. Possible tests include: A physical exam. A digital rectal exam. For this exam, your provider inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum to feel for lumps or anything unusual. The tests that are also used for screening (colonoscopy, stool tests, etc.) and biopsy , if you have not already had them. Other blood and tissue tests. What are the treatments for colorectal cancer? Your treatment options usually depend on your age, your general health, how serious the cancer is, and which type of cancer you have. For colon cancer , your treatment may include one or more of these options: Surgery. Radiofrequency ablation, a procedure that uses radio waves to heat and destroy abnormal cells. The radio waves travel through electrodes (small devices that carry electricity). Cryosurgery, a procedure in which an extremely cold liquid or an instrument called a cryoprobe is used to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. Chemotherapy . Radiation therapy . Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells. Immunotherapy . For rectal cancer , your treatment may include one or more of these options: Surgery. Radiation therapy. Chemotherapy. Active surveillance, which means having regular tests to see if your rectal cancer has changed. If the tests show the cancer is starting to grow, then you will have treatment to try to cure the cancer. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells. Immunotherapy. Can colorectal cancer be prevented? Avoiding the risk factors that you have control over may help prevent some cancers. That includes: Not smoking Limiting alcohol to under three drinks per day Managing your weight There are also other steps you can take to try to prevent colorectal cancer. They include: Getting regular colorectal cancer screenings Having polyps removed before they can become cancerous Getting regular exercise

Constipation means that a person has three or fewer bowel movements in a week. The stool can be hard and dry. Sometimes it is painful to pass. At one time or another, almost 
everyone gets constipated. In most cases, it lasts a short time and is not serious. There are many things you can do to prevent constipation. They include Eating more fruits, vegetables and grains, which are high in fiber Drinking plenty of water and other liquids Getting enough exercise Taking time to have a bowel movement when you need to Using laxatives only if your doctor says you should Asking your doctor if medicines you take may cause constipation It's not important that you have a bowel movement every day. If your bowel habits change, however, check with your doctor. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is Crohn's disease? Crohn's disease is a chronic (long-lasting) disease that causes inflammation in your digestive tract. It can affect any part of your digestive tract, which runs from your mouth to your anus. But it usually affects your small intestine and the beginning of your large intestine. Crohn's disease is an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Ulcerative colitis and microscopic colitis are other common types of IBD. What causes Crohn's disease? The cause of Crohn's disease is unknown. Researchers think that an autoimmune reaction may be one cause. An autoimmune reaction happens when your immune system attacks healthy cells in your body. Genetics may also play a role, since Crohn's disease can run in families. Stress and eating certain foods don't cause the disease, but they can make your symptoms worse. Who is more likely to develop Crohn's disease? There are certain factors that may raise your risk of Crohn's disease: Family history of the disease. Having a parent, child, or sibling with the disease puts you at higher risk. Smoking . This may double your risk of developing Crohn's disease. Certain medicines , such as antibiotics , birth-control pills , and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as aspirin or ibuprofen. These may slightly increase your chance of developing Crohn's. A high-fat diet. This may also slightly increase your risk of Crohn's. What are the symptoms of Crohn's disease? The symptoms of Crohn's disease can vary, depending where and how severe your inflammation is. The most common symptoms include: Diarrhea Cramping and pain in your abdomen Weight loss Some other possible symptoms are: Anemia , a condition in which you have fewer red blood cells than normal Eye redness or pain Fatigue Fever Joint pain or soreness Nausea or loss of appetite Skin changes that involve red, tender bumps under the skin Stress and eating certain foods such as carbonated (fizzy) drinks and high-fiber foods may make some people's symptoms worse. What other problems can Crohn's disease cause? Crohn's disease can cause other problems, including: Intestinal obstruction , a blockage in the intestine Fistulas , abnormal connections between two parts inside of the body Abscesses , pus-filled pockets of infection Anal fissures, small tears in your anus that may cause itching, pain, or bleeding Ulcers, open sores in your mouth, intestines, anus, or perineum Malnutrition , when your body does not get the right amount of vitamins , minerals , and nutrients it needs Inflammation in other areas of your body, such as your joints, eyes, and skin How is Crohn's disease diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history A physical exam, including: Checking for bloating in your abdomen. Listening to sounds within your abdomen using a stethoscope. Tapping on your abdomen to check for tenderness and pain and to see if your liver or spleen is abnormal or enlarged. Various tests, including: Blood and stool tests. A colonoscopy . An upper GI endoscopy, a procedure in which your provider uses a scope to look inside your mouth, esophagus, stomach, and small intestine. Diagnostic imaging tests, such as a CT scan or an upper GI series. An upper GI series uses a special liquid called barium and x-rays . Drinking the barium will make your upper GI tract more visible on an x-ray. What are the treatments for Crohn's disease? There is no cure for Crohn's disease, but treatments can decrease inflammation in your intestines, relieve symptoms, and prevent complications. Treatments include medicines, bowel rest, and surgery. No single treatment works for everyone. You and your provider can work together to figure out which treatment is best for you: Medicines for Crohn's include various medicines that decrease the inflammation. Many of these medicines do this by reducing the activity of your immune system. Certain medicines can also help with symptoms or complications, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and anti-diarrheal medicines. If your Crohn's causes an infection, you may need antibiotics. Bowel rest involves drinking only certain liquids or not eating or drinking anything. This allows your intestines to rest. You may need to do this if your Crohn's disease symptoms are severe. You get your nutrients through drinking a liquid, a feeding tube, or an intravenous (IV) tube. You may need to do bowel rest in the hospital, or you may be able to do it at home. It will last for a few days or up to several weeks. Surgery can treat complications and reduce symptoms when other treatments are not helping enough. The surgery will involve removing a damaged part of your digestive tract to treat: Fistulas Bleeding that is life threatening Intestinal obstructions Side effects from medicines when they threaten your health Symptoms when medicines do not improve your condition Changing your diet can help reduce symptoms. Your provider may recommend that you make changes to your diet, such as: Avoiding carbonated drinks Avoiding popcorn, vegetable skins, nuts, and other high-fiber foods Drinking more liquids Eating smaller meals more often Keeping a food diary to help identify foods that cause problems In some cases, your provider may ask you to go on a special diet, such as a diet that is: High calorie Lactose free Low fat Low fiber Low salt If you are not absorbing enough nutrients, you may need to take nutritional supplements and vitamins. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diarrhea? Diarrhea is loose, watery stools (bowel movements). You have diarrhea if you have loose stools three or more times in one day. Acute diarrhea is diarrhea that lasts a short time. It is a common problem.  It usually lasts about one or two days, but it may last longer. Then it goes away on its own. Diarrhea lasting more than a few days may be a sign of a more serious problem. Chronic diarrhea -- diarrhea that lasts at least four weeks -- can be a symptom of a chronic disease. Chronic diarrhea symptoms may be continual, or they may come and go. What causes diarrhea? The most common causes of diarrhea include: Bacteria from contaminated food or water Viruses such as the flu , norovirus , or rotavirus . Rotavirus is the most common cause of acute diarrhea in children. Parasites, which are tiny organisms found in contaminated food or water Medicines such as antibiotics, cancer drugs, and antacids that contain magnesium Food intolerances and sensitivities, which are problems digesting certain ingredients or foods. An example is lactose intolerance . Diseases that affect the stomach, small intestine, or colon, such as Crohn's disease Problems with how the colon functions, such as irritable bowel syndrome Some people also get diarrhea after stomach surgery, because sometimes the surgeries can cause food to move through your digestive system more quickly. Sometimes no cause can be found. If your diarrhea goes away within a few days, finding the cause is usually not necessary. Who is at risk for diarrhea? People of all ages can get diarrhea. On average, adults In the United States have acute diarrhea once a year. Young children have it an average of twice a year. People who visit developing countries are at risk for traveler's diarrhea . It is caused by consuming contaminated food or water. What other symptoms might I have with diarrhea? Other possible symptoms of diarrhea include: Cramps or pain in the abdomen An urgent need to use the bathroom Loss of bowel control If a virus or bacteria is the cause of your diarrhea, you may also have a fever, chills, and bloody stools. Diarrhea can cause dehydration , which means that your body does not have enough fluid to work properly. Dehydration can be serious, especially for children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems. When do I need to see a health care provider for diarrhea? Although it is usually not harmful, diarrhea can become dangerous or signal a more serious problem. Contact your health care provider if you have: Signs of dehydration Diarrhea for more than 2 days, if you are an adult. For children, contact the provider if it lasts more than 24 hours. Severe pain in your abdomen or rectum (for adults) A fever of 102 degrees or higher Stools containing blood or pus Stools that are black and tarry If children have diarrhea, parents or caregivers should not hesitate to call a health care provider. Diarrhea can be especially dangerous in newborns and infants. How is the cause of diarrhea diagnosed? To find the cause of diarrhea, your health care provider may: Do a physical exam Ask about any medicines you are taking Test your stool or blood to look for bacteria, parasites, or other signs of disease or infection Ask you to stop eating certain foods to see whether your diarrhea goes away If you have chronic diarrhea, your health care provider may perform other tests to look for signs of disease. What are the treatments for diarrhea? Diarrhea is treated by replacing lost fluids and electrolytes to prevent dehydration. Depending on the cause of the problem, you may need medicines to stop the diarrhea or treat an infection. Adults with diarrhea should drink water, fruit juices, sports drinks, sodas without caffeine, and salty broths. As your symptoms improve, you can eat soft, bland food. Children with diarrhea should be given oral rehydration solutions to replace lost fluids and electrolytes. Can diarrhea be prevented? Two types of diarrhea can be prevented - rotavirus diarrhea and traveler's diarrhea. There are vaccines for rotavirus. They are given to babies in two or three doses. You can help prevent traveler's diarrhea by being careful about what you eat and drink when you are in developing countries: Use only bottled or purified water for drinking, making ice cubes, and brushing your teeth If you do use tap water, boil it or use iodine tablets Make sure that the cooked food you eat is fully cooked and served hot Avoid unwashed or unpeeled raw fruits and vegetables NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

When you eat, your body breaks food down to a form it can use to build and nourish cells and provide energy. This process is called digestion. Your digestive system is a series of hollow organs joined in a long, twisting tube. It runs from your mouth to your anus and includes your esophagus, stomach, and small and large intestines.  Your liver, gallbladder and pancreas are also involved.  They produce juices to help digestion. There are many types of digestive disorders. The symptoms vary widely depending on the problem. In general, you should see your doctor if you have: Blood in your stool Changes in bowel habits Severe abdominal pain Unintentional weight loss Heartburn not relieved by antacids NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diverticulosis? Diverticula are small pouches, or sacs, that bulge outward through weak spots in your colon. They mostly form in the lower part of the colon. Diverticulosis is a condition in which you have these pouches. Most people who have diverticulosis do not have symptoms or problems. But sometimes the pouches can cause symptoms or become inflamed. What is diverticulitis? Diverticulitis is the name for the condition you have when one or more of the pouches get inflamed. Diverticulitis may come on suddenly. It can sometimes cause serious health problems. What is diverticular disease? Diverticular disease is a condition that happens when the pouches cause: Chronic (long-term) symptoms Diverticular bleeding Diverticulitis or diverticulitis complications What causes diverticulosis and diverticulitis? Researchers aren't sure what causes diverticulosis and diverticulitis. They think certain factors may play a role in causing or increasing the risk for these conditions, including: Your genetics. Certain genes may make some people more likely to develop the conditions. Lifestyle factors such as: Diets low in fiber and high in red meat Lack of physical activity Taking certain medicines, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and steroids Having obesity Smoking Researchers are also looking at other possible factors that may play a role in these conditions. Those factors include bacteria or stool (poop) getting caught in a pouch in your colon and changes in the microbiome in the intestines. Your microbiome is made up of the bacteria and other organisms in your intestines. Who is more likely to develop diverticulosis and diverticulitis? Diverticulosis is common, especially as people age. More than one-third of U.S. adults between the ages of 50 and 59 have diverticulosis. More than two-thirds who are over age 80 have it. Most of those people will not have symptoms or problems. But some of them will develop diverticulitis. What are the symptoms of diverticulosis and diverticulitis? Diverticulosis usually doesn't cause symptoms. But some people can have chronic symptoms such as: Bloating Constipation or diarrhea Cramping or pain in the lower abdomen (belly) Diverticulitis may cause acute symptoms such as: Abdominal pain, most often in the lower left side of your abdomen Constipation or diarrhea Fevers and chills Nausea or vomiting The pain caused by diverticulitis is usually severe and comes on suddenly. Less often, the pain may be mild and worsen over several days. What other problems can diverticulosis and diverticulitis cause? Some people with diverticulosis and diverticulitis may develop serious health problems (complications). Diverticular bleeding happens when a small blood vessel within the wall of a pouch bursts. The bleeding may be severe and sometimes even life-threatening. People with diverticulitis can also develop serious problems such as: Abscess , a painful, swollen, pus-filled area caused by infection Fistula , an abnormal opening or passage between the colon and another part of the body, such as the bladder or vagina Intestinal obstruction , a partial or total blockage that keeps food, fluids, air, or stool from moving through your intestines Perforation, or a hole, in your colon Peritonitis , an infection of the lining of the abdominal cavity How are diverticulosis and diverticulitis diagnosed? Diverticulosis may be found when your health care provider is doing tests for another reason. Diverticulitis is usually found when you are having an acute attack. To make a diagnosis, your provider will review your medical history, do a physical exam, and order tests. The tests may include: Blood tests Stool tests Imaging tests such as CT scan , ultrasound , or MRI Colonoscopy What are the treatments for diverticulosis and diverticulitis? f your diverticulosis is causing chronic symptoms, your provider may recommend: High-fiber foods or fiber supplements Antibiotics Medicines to reduce inflammation Probiotics If you have diverticulitis without complications, your provider may recommend treatment at home. However, you probably need treatment in the hospital if you have severe diverticulitis, diverticulitis with complications, or a high risk for complications. Treatments for diverticulitis may include: Antibiotics, except for very mild cases. A clear liquid diet for a short time to rest the colon. Your provider may suggest slowly adding solid foods to your diet as your symptoms improve. Medicines for pain. This is usually acetaminophen instead of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). NSAIDs may increase the chance of diverticulitis complications. Antispasmodic medicines to relieve spasms. If your diverticulitis doesn't improve with treatment or if it causes complications, you may need surgery to remove part of your colon. Can diverticulitis be prevented? Your provider may recommend lifestyle changes to prevent diverticulitis: Eating a diet high in fiber and low in red meat Being physically active on a regular basis Not smoking (and quitting smoking if you are a smoker) Reaching and maintaining a healthy weigh t NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

The esophagus is a hollow tube that carries food and liquids from your throat to your stomach.  Early esophageal cancer usually does not cause symptoms. Later, you may have symptoms such as: Painful or difficult swallowing Weight loss A hoarse voice or cough that doesn't go away You're at greater risk for getting esophageal cancer if you smoke, drink heavily, or have acid reflux . Your risk also goes up as you age Your doctor uses imaging tests and a biopsy to diagnose esophageal cancer.  Treatments include surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.  You might also need nutritional support , since the cancer or treatment may make it hard to swallow. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The esophagus is the muscular tube that carries food and liquids from your mouth to the stomach. You may not be aware of your esophagus until you swallow something too large, too hot, or too cold. You may also notice it when something is wrong. You may feel pain or have trouble swallowing . The most common problem with the esophagus is GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease). With GERD, a muscle at the end of your esophagus does not close properly. This allows stomach contents to leak back, or reflux, into the esophagus and irritate it. Over time, GERD can cause damage to the esophagus. Other problems include heartburn , cancer , and eosinophilic esophagitis . Doctors may use various tests to make a diagnosis. These include imaging tests, an upper endoscopy, and a biopsy. Treatment depends on the problem. Some problems get better with over-the-counter medicines or changes in diet. Others may need prescription medicines or surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is fatty liver disease? Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. Fatty liver disease is a condition in which fat builds up in your liver. There are two main types: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) Alcoholic fatty liver disease, also called alcoholic steatohepatitis What is nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)? NAFLD is a type of fatty liver disease that is not related to heavy alcohol use. There are two kinds: Simple fatty liver, in which you have fat in your liver but little or no inflammation or liver cell damage. Simple fatty liver typically does not get bad enough to cause liver damage or complications. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), in which you have inflammation and liver cell damage, as well as fat in your liver. Inflammation and liver cell damage can cause fibrosis, or scarring, of the liver. NASH may lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer . What is alcoholic fatty liver disease? Alcoholic fatty liver disease is due to heavy alcohol use. Your liver breaks down most of the alcohol you drink, so it can be removed from your body. But the process of breaking it down can generate harmful substances. These substances can damage liver cells, promote inflammation, and weaken your body's natural defenses. The more alcohol that you drink, the more you damage your liver.  Alcoholic fatty liver disease is the earliest stage of alcohol-related liver disease. The next stages are alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Who is at risk for fatty liver disease? The cause of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is unknown. Researchers do know that it is more common in people who: Have type 2 diabetes and prediabetes Have obesity Are middle aged or older (although children can also get it) Are Hispanic, followed by non-Hispanic whites. It is less common in African Americans. Have high levels of fats in the blood, such as cholesterol and triglycerides Have high blood pressure Take certain drugs, such as corticosteroids and some cancer drugs Have certain metabolic disorders , including metabolic syndrome Have rapid weight loss Have certain infections, such as hepatitis C Have been exposed to some toxins NAFLD affects about 25% of people in the world. As the rates of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and high cholesterol are rising in the United States, so is the rate of NAFLD. NAFLD is the most common chronic liver disorder in the United States. Alcoholic fatty liver disease only happens in people who are heavy drinkers, especially those who have been drinking for a long period of time. The risk is higher for heavy drinkers who are women, have obesity, or have certain genetic mutations. What are the symptoms of fatty liver disease? Both NAFLD and alcoholic fatty liver disease are usually silent diseases with few or no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, you may feel tired or have discomfort in the upper right side of your abdomen. How is fatty liver disease diagnosed? Because there are often no symptoms, it is not easy to find fatty liver disease. Your doctor may suspect that you have it if you get abnormal results on liver tests that you had for other reasons. To make a diagnosis, your doctor will use: Your medical history A physical exam Various tests, including blood and imaging tests , and sometimes a biopsy As part of the medical history, your doctor will ask about your alcohol use, to find out whether fat in your liver is a sign of alcoholic fatty liver disease or nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFLD). He or she will also ask which medicines you take, to try to determine whether a medicine is causing your NAFLD. During the physical exam, your doctor will examine your body and check your weight and height. Your doctor will look for signs of fatty liver disease, such as: An enlarged liver Signs of cirrhosis, such as jaundice , a condition that causes your skin and whites of your eyes to turn yellow You will likely have blood tests, including liver function tests and blood count tests . In some cases you may also have imaging tests, like those that check for fat in the liver and the stiffness of your liver. Liver stiffness can mean fibrosis, which is scarring of the liver. In some cases you may also need a liver biopsy to confirm the diagnosis, and to check how bad the liver damage is. What are the treatments for fatty liver disease? Doctors recommend weight loss for nonalcoholic fatty liver. Weight loss can reduce fat in the liver, inflammation, and fibrosis. If your doctor thinks that a certain medicine is the cause of your NAFLD, you should stop taking that medicine.  But check with your doctor before stopping the medicine. You may need to get off the medicine gradually, and you might need to switch to another medicine instead. There are no medicines that have been approved to treat NAFLD. Studies are investigating whether a certain diabetes medicine or Vitamin E can help, but more studies are needed. The most important part of treating alcohol-related fatty liver disease is to stop drinking alcohol. If you need help doing that, you may want to see a therapist or participate in an alcohol recovery program. There are also medicines that can help, either by reducing your cravings or making you feel sick if you drink alcohol. Both alcoholic fatty liver disease and one type of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis) can lead to cirrhosis. Doctors can treat the health problems caused by cirrhosis with medicines, operations, and other medical procedures. If the cirrhosis leads to liver failure, you may need a liver transplant . What are some lifestyle changes that can help with fatty liver disease? If you have any of the types of fatty liver disease, there are some lifestyle changes that can help: Eat a healthy diet, limiting salt and sugar, plus eating lots of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains Get vaccinations for hepatitis A and B , the flu and pneumococcal disease . If you get hepatitis A or B along with fatty liver, it is more likely to lead to liver failure. People with chronic liver disease are more likely to get infections, so the other two vaccinations are also important. Get regular exercise , which can help you lose weight and reduce fat in the liver Talk with your doctor before using dietary supplements , such as vitamins , or any complementary or alternative medicines or medical practices . Some herbal remedies can damage your liver.

Your gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ under your liver. It stores bile, a fluid made by your liver to digest fat. As your stomach and intestines digest food, your gallbladder releases bile through a tube called the common bile duct. The duct connects your gallbladder and liver to your small intestine. Cancer of the gallbladder is rare. It is more common in women and Native Americans. Symptoms include Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes) Pain above the stomach Fever Nausea and vomiting Bloating Lumps in the abdomen It is hard to diagnose gallbladder cancer in its early stages.  Sometimes doctors find it when they remove the gallbladder for another reason. But people with gallstones rarely have gallbladder cancer. Because it is often found late, it can be hard to treat gallbladder cancer. Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, or a combination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ under your liver. It stores bile, a fluid made by your liver to digest fat. As your stomach and intestines digest food, your gallbladder releases bile through a tube called the common bile duct. The duct connects your gallbladder and liver to your small intestine. Your gallbladder is most likely to give you trouble if something blocks the flow of bile through the bile ducts . That is usually a gallstone . Gallstones form when substances in bile harden. Rarely, you can also get cancer in your gallbladder. Many gallbladder problems get better with removal of the gallbladder. Fortunately, you can live without a gallbladder. Bile has other ways of reaching your small intestine.

Your gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ under your liver. It stores bile, a fluid made by your liver to digest fat. As your stomach and intestines digest food, your gallbladder releases bile through a tube called the common bile duct. The duct connects your gallbladder and liver to your small intestine. Your gallbladder is most likely to give you trouble if something blocks the flow of bile through the bile ducts . That is usually a  gallstone. Gallstones form when substances in bile harden. Gallstone attacks usually happen after you eat. Signs of a gallstone attack may include nausea, vomiting, or pain in the abdomen, back, or just under the right arm. Gallstones are most common among older adults, women, overweight people, Native Americans and Mexican Americans. Gallstones are often found during imaging tests for other health conditions. If you do not have symptoms, you usually do not need treatment. The most common treatment is removal of the gallbladder. Fortunately, you can live without a gallbladder.  Bile has other ways to reach your small intestine. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Everyone has gas. Most people pass gas 13 to 21 times a day. Passing gas through the mouth is called belching or burping.  Passing gas through the anus is called flatulence. Most of the time gas does not have an odor. The odor comes from bacteria in the large intestine that release small amounts of gases that contain sulfur. Gas in the digestive tract comes from two sources: air that you swallow and the breakdown of undigested food by bacteria in the large intestine.  Certain foods may cause gas.  Foods that produce gas in one person may not cause gas in another. You can reduce the amount of gas you have by: Drinking lots of water and non-fizzy drinks Eating more slowly so you swallow less air when you eat Avoiding milk products if you have lactose intolerance Medicines can help reduce gas or the pain and bloating caused by gas. If your symptoms still bother you, see your health care provider. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is gastroenteritis? Gastroenteritis is an inflammation of the lining of the stomach and intestines. The main symptoms include vomiting and diarrhea . It is usually not serious in healthy people, but it can sometimes lead to dehydration or cause severe symptoms. What causes gastroenteritis? There can be many different causes of gastroenteritis: Viruses Bacteria Parasites Chemicals Reactions to certain medicines and food Viral gastroenteritis is the most common type. It can be caused by many different viruses, including noroviruses and rotaviruses . Some people call viral gastroenteritis the "stomach flu." But this name is not medically correct. It is not caused by flu viruses. The flu is a respiratory infection that affects your nose, throat and lungs. When gastroenteritis is caused by consuming foods or drinks contaminated with viruses, bacteria, parasites, or chemicals, this is called food poisoning . The viruses, bacteria, and parasites that cause gastroenteritis can also spread from person to person. You could be infected when you touch something that has the germs on it and then touch your eyes, mouth, or nose. What are the symptoms of gastroenteritis? The symptoms of gastroenteritis include: Diarrhea Pain or cramping in your abdomen (belly) Nausea Vomiting Sometimes fever Gastroenteritis is usually not serious. But it can sometimes cause lead to dehydration or cause severe symptoms. Certain people are at higher risk for these problems. They include: Pregnant women Older adults People with weakened immune systems or other serious health conditions Infants Babies who were born prematurely or have other health conditions If you or a family member are at higher risk and have symptoms of gastroenteritis, contact a health care provider right away.
Even if you are not at high risk, it is possible to become dehydrated or have more serious symptoms. There are some warning signs to watch for. It's important to contact a provider right away if you or your child have any of them: For adults, they include: Change in mental state, such as irritability or lack of energy Diarrhea lasting more than 2 days High fever Vomiting often Six or more loose stools in a day Severe pain in the abdomen (belly) or rectum Stools that are black and tarry or contain blood or pus Symptoms of dehydration, such as thirst, dry mouth , headache, dark-colored urine, and urinating less than normal For infants and children, they include: Change in the child's mental state, such as irritability or lack of energy Diarrhea lasting more than a day Any fever in infants High fever in older children Frequent loose stools Vomiting often Severe pain in the abdomen (belly) or rectum Signs or symptoms of dehydration, such as thirst, dry mouth, urinating less than usual or no wet diapers for 3 hours or more, and no tears when crying Stools that are black and tarry or contain blood or pus How is gastroenteritis diagnosed? To find out if you have gastroenteritis, your provider: Will do a physical exam Will ask about your symptoms May do tests of your stool What are the treatments for gastroenteritis? Usually, people with gastroenteritis get better on their own, with rest and plenty of fluids and electrolytes . Your provider may suggest that you take a probiotic. Studies suggest that some probiotics may help shorten a case of diarrhea. People with more severe symptoms may need medicines to control nausea or vomiting. Providers may also give other medicines for certain types of gastroenteritis, such as antibiotics for some bacterial types and antiparasitic medicines for some parasitic types. Can gastroenteritis be prevented? Gastroenteritis cannot always be prevented. But proper hand washing , cleaning surfaces that may be infected with germs, and safe food preparation may help prevent some of the infections that can cause gastroenteritis. There are vaccines for infants to protect against rotavirus infections. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine or colon, rectum, and anus. Bleeding can come from any of these areas. The amount of bleeding can be so small that only a lab test can find it. Signs of bleeding in the digestive tract depend where it is and how much bleeding there is. Signs of bleeding in the upper digestive tract include: Bright red blood in vomit Vomit that looks like coffee grounds Black or tarry stool Dark blood mixed with stool Signs of bleeding in the lower digestive tract include: Black or tarry stool Dark blood mixed with stool Stool mixed or coated with bright red blood GI bleeding is not a disease, but a symptom of a disease. There are many possible causes of GI bleeding, including hemorrhoids , peptic ulcers , tears or inflammation in the esophagus, diverticulosis and diverticulitis , ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease , colonic polyps , or cancer in the colon , stomach or esophagus . The test used most often to look for the cause of GI bleeding is called endoscopy . It uses a flexible instrument inserted through the mouth or rectum to view the inside of the GI tract. A type of endoscopy called colonoscopy looks at the large intestine. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your esophagus is the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) happens when a muscle at the end of your esophagus does not close properly. This allows stomach contents to leak back, or reflux, into the esophagus and irritate it. You may feel a burning in the chest or throat called heartburn .  Sometimes, you can taste stomach fluid in the back of the mouth.  If you have these symptoms more than twice a week, you may have GERD. You can also have GERD without having heartburn. Your symptoms could include a dry cough, asthma symptoms, or trouble swallowing. Anyone, including infants and children , can have GERD.  If not treated, it can lead to more serious health problems. In some cases, you might need medicines or surgery.  However, many people can improve their symptoms by: Avoiding alcohol and spicy, fatty or acidic foods that trigger heartburn Eating smaller meals Not eating close to bedtime Losing weight if needed Wearing loose-fitting clothes NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Heartburn is a painful burning feeling in your chest or throat. It happens when stomach acid backs up into your esophagus, the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. If you have heartburn more than twice a week, you may have GERD . But you can have GERD without having heartburn. Pregnancy, certain foods, alcohol, and some medications can bring on heartburn. Treating heartburn is important because over time reflux can damage the esophagus. Over-the-counter medicines may help.  If the heartburn continues, you may need prescription medicines or surgery. If you have other symptoms such as crushing chest pain, it could be a heart attack . Get help immediately.

What are hemorrhoids? Hemorrhoids are swollen, inflamed veins around your anus or the lower part of your rectum . There are two types: External hemorrhoids, which form under the skin around your anus Internal hemorrhoids, which form in the lining of your anus and lower rectum What causes hemorrhoids? Hemorrhoids happen when there is too much pressure on the veins around the anus. This can be caused by: Straining during bowel movements . Sitting on the toilet for long periods of time. Chronic constipation or diarrhea . A low- fiber diet. Weakening of the supporting tissues in your anus and rectum. This can happen with aging and pregnancy . Frequently lifting heavy objects. What are the symptoms of hemorrhoids? The symptoms of hemorrhoids depend on which type you have: With external hemorrhoids, you may have: Anal itching One or more hard, tender lumps near your anus Anal pain, especially when sitting Too much straining, rubbing, or cleaning around your anus may make your symptoms worse. For many people, the symptoms of external hemorrhoids go away within a few days. With internal hemorrhoids, you may have: Bleeding from your rectum - you would see bright red blood in your stool, on toilet paper, or in the toilet bowl after a bowel movement Prolapse, which is a hemorrhoid that has fallen through your anal opening Internal hemorrhoids are usually not painful unless they are prolapsed. Prolapsed internal hemorrhoids may cause pain and discomfort. How can I treat hemorrhoids at home? You can most often treat your hemorrhoids at home by: Eating foods that are high in fiber. Taking a stool softener or a fiber supplement. Drinking enough fluids every day. Not straining during bowel movements. Not sitting on the toilet for long periods of time. Taking over-the-counter pain relievers . Taking warm baths several times a day to help relieve pain. This could be a regular bath or a sitz bath. With a sitz bath, you use a special plastic tub that allows you to sit in a few inches of warm water. Using over-the-counter hemorrhoid creams, ointments, or suppositories to relieve mild pain, swelling, and itching of external hemorrhoids. When do I need to see a health care provider for hemorrhoids? You should see your health care provider if you: Still have symptoms after 1 week of at-home treatment. Have bleeding from your rectum. Hemorrhoids are a common cause of bleeding, but other conditions can also cause bleeding. They include Crohn's disease , ulcerative colitis , colorectal cancer , and anal cancer . So it's important to see your provider to find the cause of the bleeding. How are hemorrhoids diagnosed? To find out if you have hemorrhoids, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history. Will do a physical exam. Often providers can diagnose external hemorrhoids by looking at the area around your anus. Will do a digital rectal exam to check for internal hemorrhoids. For this, the provider will insert a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for anything that is abnormal. May do procedures such as an anoscopy to check for internal hemorrhoids. What are the treatments for hemorrhoids? If at-home treatments for hemorrhoids don't help you, you may need a medical procedure. There are several different procedures that your provider can do in the office. These procedures use different techniques to cause scar tissue to form in the hemorrhoids. This cuts off the blood supply, which usually shrinks the hemorrhoids. In severe cases, you may need surgery. Can hemorrhoids be prevented? You can help prevent hemorrhoids by: Eating foods that are high in fiber Taking a stool softener or a fiber supplement Drinking enough fluids every day Not straining during bowel movements Not sitting on the toilet for long periods of time NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hepatitis? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver . Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. It can damage your liver. This swelling and damage can affect how well your liver functions. Hepatitis can be an acute (short-term) infection or a chronic (long-term) infection. Some types of hepatitis cause only acute infections. Other types can cause both acute and chronic infections. What causes hepatitis? There are different types of hepatitis, with different causes: Viral hepatitis is the most common type. It is caused by one of several viruses -- hepatitis viruses A , B , C , D, and E. In the United States, A, B, and C are the most common. Alcoholic hepatitis is caused by heavy alcohol use Toxic hepatitis can be caused by certain poisons, chemicals, medicines, or supplements Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic type in which your body's immune system attacks your liver. The cause is not known, but genetics and your environment may play a role. How is viral hepatitis spread? Hepatitis A and hepatitis E usually spread through contact with food or water that was contaminated with an infected person's stool. You can also get hepatitis E by eating undercooked pork, deer, or shellfish. Hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and hepatitis D spread through contact with the blood of someone who has the disease. Hepatitis B and D may also spread through contact with other body fluids. This can happen in many ways, such as sharing drug needles or having unprotected sex. Who is at risk for hepatitis? The risks are different for the different types of hepatitis. For example, with most of the viral types, your risk is higher if you have unprotected sex.  People who drink a lot over long periods of time are at risk for alcoholic hepatitis. What are the symptoms of hepatitis? Some people with hepatitis do not have symptoms and do not know they are infected. If you do have symptoms, they may include: Fever Fatigue Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Abdominal pain Dark urine Clay-colored bowel movements Joint pain Jaundice , yellowing of your skin and eyes If you have an acute infection, your symptoms can start anywhere between 2 weeks to 6 months after you got infected. If you have a chronic infection, you may not have symptoms until many years later. What other problems can hepatitis cause? Chronic hepatitis can lead to complications such as cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), liver failure, and liver cancer . Early diagnosis and treatment of chronic hepatitis may prevent these complications. How is hepatitis diagnosed? To diagnose hepatitis, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history Will do a physical exam Will likely do blood tests, including tests for viral hepatitis Might do imaging tests , such as an ultrasound , CT scan , or MRI May need to do a liver biopsy to get a clear diagnosis and check for liver damage What are the treatments for hepatitis? Treatment for hepatitis depends on which type you have and whether it is acute or chronic. Acute viral hepatitis often goes away on its own. To feel better, you may just need to rest and get enough fluids. But in some cases, it may be more serious. You might even need treatment in a hospital. There are different medicines to treat the different chronic types of hepatitis. Possible other treatments may include surgery and other medical procedures. People who have alcoholic hepatitis need to stop drinking. If your chronic hepatitis leads to liver failure or liver cancer, you may need a liver transplant . Can hepatitis be prevented? There are different ways to prevent or lower your risk for hepatitis, depending on the type of hepatitis. For example, not drinking too much alcohol can prevent alcoholic hepatitis. There are vaccines to prevent hepatitis A and B. Autoimmune hepatitis cannot be prevented. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hepatitis? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver . Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. It can damage your liver. This swelling and damage can affect how well your liver functions. What is hepatitis A? Hepatitis A is a type of viral hepatitis. It causes an acute, or short-term, infection. This means that people usually get better without treatment after a few weeks. Thanks to a vaccine, hepatitis A is not very common in the United States. What causes hepatitis A? Hepatitis A is caused by the hepatitis A virus. The virus spreads through contact with an infected person's stool. This can happen if you: Eat food made by someone who has the virus and did not properly wash their hands after using the bathroom Drink contaminated water or eat foods that were rinsed with contaminated water Have close personal contact with someone who has hepatitis A. This could be through certain types of sex (like oral-anal sex), taking care of someone who is ill, or using illegal drugs with others. Who is at risk for hepatitis A? Although anyone can get hepatitis A, you are at higher risk if you: Travel to developing countries Have sex with someone who has hepatitis A Are a man who has sex with men Use illegal drugs Are experiencing homelessness Live with or care for someone who has hepatitis A Live with or care for a child recently adopted from a country where hepatitis A is common What are the symptoms of hepatitis A? Not everyone with hepatitis A has symptoms. Adults are more likely to have symptoms than children. If you do have symptoms, they usually start 2 to 7 weeks after infection. They can include: Dark yellow urine Diarrhea Fatigue Fever Gray- or clay-colored stools Joint pain Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Abdominal pain Yellowish eyes and skin, called jaundice The symptoms usually last less than 2 months, although some people can be ill for as long as 6 months. You are at a higher risk of getting a more severe infection from hepatitis A if you also have HIV , hepatitis B , or hepatitis C . What other problems can hepatitis A cause? In rare cases, hepatitis A may lead to liver failure. This is more common in adults over age 50 and in people who have another liver . How is hepatitis A diagnosed? To diagnose hepatitis A, your health care provider may use many tools: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam Blood tests, including tests for viral hepatitis What are the treatments for hepatitis A? There is no specific treatment for hepatitis A. The best way to recover is to rest, drink plenty of liquids, and eat healthy foods. Your provider may also suggest medicines to help relieve symptoms. In more severe cases, you may need care in a hospital. Can hepatitis A be prevented? The best way to prevent hepatitis A is to get the hepatitis A vaccine. It is also important to have good hygiene , especially washing your hands thoroughly after you go to the bathroom. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hepatitis? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver . Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. It can damage your liver. This swelling and damage can affect how well your liver functions. What is hepatitis B? Hepatitis B is a type of viral hepatitis. It can cause an acute (short-term) or chronic (long-term) infection. People with an acute infection usually get better on their own without treatment. Some people with chronic hepatitis B will need treatment. Thanks to a vaccine, hepatitis B is not very common in the United States. It is more common in certain parts of the world, such as sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia. What causes hepatitis B? Hepatitis B is caused by the hepatitis B virus. The virus spreads through contact with blood, semen, or other body fluids from a person who has the virus. Who is at risk for hepatitis B? Anyone can get hepatitis B, but the risk is higher in: Infants born to mothers who have hepatitis B People who inject drugs or share needles, syringes, and other types of drug equipment Sex partners of people with hepatitis B, especially if they are not using latex or polyurethane condoms during sex Men who have sex with men People who live with someone who has hepatitis B, especially if they use the same razor, toothbrush, or nail clippers Health care and public-safety workers who are exposed to blood on the job Hemodialysis patients People who have lived in or traveled often to parts of the world where hepatitis B is common Have diabetes , hepatitis C , or HIV What are the symptoms of hepatitis B? Often, people with hepatitis B don't have symptoms. Adults and children over 5 are more likely to have symptoms than younger children. Some people with acute hepatitis B have symptoms 2 to 5 months after infection. These symptoms can include: Dark yellow urine Diarrhea Fatigue Fever Gray- or clay-colored stools Joint pain Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Abdominal pain Yellowish eyes and skin, called jaundice If you have chronic hepatitis B, you may not have symptoms until complications develop. This could be decades after you were infected. For this reason, hepatitis B screening is important, even if you have no symptoms. Screening means that you are tested for a disease even though you don't have symptoms. If you are at high risk, your health care provider may suggest  screening. What other problems can hepatitis B cause? In rare cases, acute hepatitis B can cause liver failure. Chronic hepatitis B can develop into a serious disease that causes long-term health problems such as cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), liver cancer , and liver failure. If you have ever had hepatitis B, the virus may become active again, or reactivated, later in life. This could start to damage the liver and cause symptoms. How is hepatitis B diagnosed? To diagnose hepatitis B, your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam Blood tests, including tests for viral hepatitis What are the treatments for hepatitis B? If you have acute hepatitis B, you probably don't need treatment. Some people with chronic hepatitis B don't need treatment. But if you have a chronic infection and blood tests show that hepatitis B could be damaging your liver, you may need to take antiviral medicines. Can hepatitis B be prevented? The best way to prevent hepatitis B is to get the hepatitis B vaccine. You can also reduce your chance of hepatitis B infection by: Not sharing drug needles or other drug materials Wearing gloves if you have to touch another person's blood or open sores Making sure your tattoo artist or body piercer uses sterile tools Not sharing personal items, such as toothbrushes, razors, or nail clippers Using a latex condom during sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. If you think you have been in contact with the hepatitis B virus, see your health care provider right away. Your provider may give you a dose of the hepatitis B vaccine to prevent infection. In some cases, your provider may also give you a medicine called hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG). You need to get the vaccine and the HBIG (if needed) as soon as possible after coming into contact with the virus. It is best if you can get them within 24 hours. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hepatitis C? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver. Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. Inflammation can damage organs. There are different types of hepatitis. One type, hepatitis C, is caused by the hepatitis C virus (HCV). Hepatitis C can range from a mild illness lasting a few weeks to a serious, lifelong illness. Hepatitis C can be acute or chronic: Acute hepatitis C is a short-term infection. The symptoms can last up to 6 months. Sometimes your body is able to fight off the infection and the virus goes away. But for most people, an acute infection leads to chronic infection. Chronic hepatitis C is a long-lasting infection. If it is not treated, it can last for a lifetime and cause serious health problems, including liver damage, cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), liver cancer , and even death. How is hepatitis C spread? Hepatitis C spreads through contact with the blood of someone who has HCV. This contact may be through: Sharing drug needles or other drug materials with someone who has HCV. In the United States, this is the most common way that people get hepatitis C. Getting an accidental stick with a needle that was used on someone who has HCV. This can happen in health care settings. Being tattooed or pierced with tools or inks that were not sterilized after being used on someone who has HCV. Having contact with the blood or open sores of someone who has HCV. Sharing personal care items that may have come in contact with another person's blood, such as razors or toothbrushes. Being born to a mother with HCV. Having unprotected sex with someone who has HCV. Before 1992, hepatitis C was also commonly spread through blood transfusions and organ transplants. Since then, there has been routine testing of the U.S. blood supply for HCV. It is now very rare for someone to get HCV this way. Who is more likely to get hepatitis C? You are more likely to get hepatitis C if you: Have injected drugs Had a blood transfusion or organ transplant before July 1992 Have hemophilia and received clotting factor before 1987 Have been on kidney dialysis Have been in contact with blood or infected needles at work Have had tattoos or body piercings Have worked or lived in a prison Were born to a mother with hepatitis C Have HIV Have had more than one sex partner in the last 6 months Have had a sexually transmitted infection (STI) Are a man who has had sex with men (MSM) If you are at high risk for hepatitis C, your health care provider will likely recommend that you get tested for it. What are the symptoms of hepatitis C? Most people with hepatitis C have no symptoms. Some people with acute hepatitis C do have symptoms within 1 to 3 months after they are exposed to the virus. These symptoms may include: Dark yellow urine Fatigue Fever Gray- or clay-colored stools Joint pain Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Pain in your abdomen (belly) Jaundice (yellowish eyes and skin) If you have chronic hepatitis C, you probably will not have symptoms until it causes complications. This can happen decades after you were infected. For this reason, hepatitis C screening is important, even if you have no symptoms. What other problems can hepatitis C cause? Without treatment, hepatitis C may lead to cirrhosis, liver failure, and liver cancer. Early diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis C can prevent these complications. How is hepatitis C diagnosed? Providers diagnose hepatitis C based on your medical history, a physical exam, and blood tests. If you do have hepatitis C, you may need additional tests to check for liver damage. These tests may include other blood tests, an ultrasound of the liver, and a liver biopsy . What are the treatments for hepatitis C? Treatment for hepatitis C is with antiviral medicines. They can cure the disease in most cases. If you have acute hepatitis C, your provider may wait to see if your infection becomes chronic before starting treatment. If your hepatitis C causes cirrhosis, you should see a doctor who specializes in liver diseases. Treatments for health problems related to cirrhosis include medicines, surgery, and other medical procedures. If your hepatitis C leads to liver failure or liver cancer, you may need a liver transplant . Can hepatitis C be prevented? There is no vaccine for hepatitis C. But you can help protect yourself from hepatitis C infection by: Not sharing drug needles or other drug materials. Wearing gloves if you have to touch another person's blood or open sores. Making sure your tattoo artist or body piercer uses sterile tools and unopened ink. Not sharing personal items such toothbrushes, razors, or nail clippers. Using a latex condom during sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A hernia happens when part of an internal organ or tissue bulges through a weak area of muscle. Most hernias are in the abdomen. There are several types of hernias, including: Inguinal, in the groin. This is the the most common type. Umbilical, around the belly button Incisional, through a scar Hiatal , a small opening in the diaphragm that allows the upper part of the stomach to move up into the chest. Congenital diaphragmatic, a birth defect that needs surgery Hernias are common. They can affect men, women, and children.  A combination of muscle weakness and straining, such as with heavy lifting, might contribute. Some people are born with weak abdominal muscles and may be more likely to get a hernia. Treatment is usually surgery to repair the opening in the muscle wall. Untreated hernias can cause pain and health problems.

A hiatal hernia is a condition in which the upper part of your stomach bulges through an opening in your diaphragm. Your diaphragm is the thin muscle that separates your chest from your abdomen. Your diaphragm helps keep acid from coming up into your esophagus. When you have a hiatal hernia, it's easier for the acid to come up. This leaking of acid from your stomach into your esophagus is called GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease). GERD may cause symptoms such as : Heartburn Problems swallowing A dry cough Bad breath Nausea and/or vomiting Breathing problems The wearing away of your teeth Often, the cause of a hiatal hernia is unknown. It may have to do with weakness in the surrounding muscles. Sometimes the cause is an injury or a birth defect. Your risk of getting a hiatal hernia goes up as you age; they are common in people over age 50. You are also at higher risk if you have obesity or smoke. People usually find out that they have a hiatal hernia when they are getting tests for GERD, heartburn, chest pain , or abdominal pain . The tests may be a chest x-ray, an x-ray with a barium swallow, or an upper endoscopy. You don't need treatment if your hiatal hernia does not cause any symptoms or problems. If you do have symptoms, some lifestyle changes may help. They include eating small meals, avoiding certain foods, not smoking or drinking alcohol, and losing weight. Your health care provider may recommend antacids or other medicines. If these don't help, you may need surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your small intestine is part of your digestive system.  It is a long tube that connects your stomach to your large intestine. Intestinal cancer is rare, but eating a high-fat diet or having Crohn's disease , celiac disease, or a history of colonic polyps can increase your risk. Possible signs of small intestine cancer include: Abdominal pain Weight loss for no reason Blood in the stool A lump in the abdomen Imaging tests that create pictures of the small intestine and the area around it can help diagnose intestinal cancer and show whether it has spread. Surgery is the most common treatment. Additional options include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or a combination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

An intestinal obstruction occurs when food or stool cannot move through the intestines. The obstruction can be complete or partial. There are many causes. The most common are adhesions , hernias , cancers, and certain medicines. Symptoms include: Severe abdominal pain or cramping Vomiting Bloating Loud bowel sounds Swelling of the abdomen Inability to pass gas Constipation A complete intestinal obstruction is a medical emergency.  It often requires surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a problem that affects the large intestine. It can cause abdominal cramping, bloating, and a change in bowel habits. Some people with the disorder have constipation. Some have diarrhea. Others go back and forth between the two. Although IBS can cause a great deal of discomfort, it does not harm the intestines. IBS is  common. It affects about twice as many women as men and is most often found in people younger than 45 years.  No one knows the exact cause of IBS.  There is no specific test for it. Your doctor may run tests to be sure you don't have other diseases. These tests may include stool sampling tests, blood tests, and x-rays. Your doctor may also do a test called a sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy .  Most people diagnosed with IBS can control their symptoms with diet, stress management, probiotics, and medicine. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Islets are cells found in clusters throughout the pancreas . They are made up of several types of cells. One of these is beta cells, which make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the body use glucose for energy. Islet cell transplantation transfers cells from an organ donor into the body of another person. It is an experimental treatment for type 1 diabetes . In type 1 diabetes, the beta cells of the pancreas no longer make insulin. A person who has type 1 diabetes must take insulin daily to live. Transplanted islet cells, however, can take over the work of the destroyed cells. The beta cells in these islets will begin to make and release insulin. Researchers hope islet transplantation will help people with type 1 diabetes live without daily insulin injections. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Jaundice causes your skin and the whites of your eyes to turn yellow. Too much bilirubin causes jaundice.  Bilirubin is a yellow chemical in hemoglobin, the substance that carries oxygen in your red blood cells. As red blood cells break down, your body builds new cells to replace them. The old ones are processed by the liver. If the liver cannot handle the blood cells as they break down, bilirubin builds up in the body and your skin may look yellow. Many healthy babies have some jaundice during the first week of life.  It usually goes away.   However, jaundice can happen at any age and may be a sign of a problem.  Jaundice can happen for many reasons, such as: Blood diseases Genetic syndromes Liver diseases, such as hepatitis or cirrhosis Blockage of bile ducts Infections Medicines

Lactose intolerance means that you cannot digest foods with lactose in them. Lactose is the sugar found in milk and foods made with milk. After eating foods with lactose in them, you may feel sick to your stomach. You may also have: Gas Diarrhea Swelling in your stomach Your doctor may do a blood, breath or stool test to find out if your problems are due to lactose intolerance. Lactose intolerance is not serious.  Eating less food with lactose, or using pills or drops to help you digest lactose usually helps. You may need to take a calcium supplement if you don't get enough of it from your diet, since milk and foods made with milk are the most common source of calcium for most people. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. Primary liver cancer starts in the liver.  Metastatic liver cancer starts somewhere else and spreads to your liver. Risk factors for primary liver cancer include : Having hepatitis B or C Heavy alcohol use Having cirrhosis , or scarring of the liver Having hemochromatosis , an iron storage disease Obesity and diabetes Symptoms can include a lump or pain on the right side of your abdomen and yellowing of the skin. However, you may not have symptoms until the cancer is advanced.  This makes it harder to treat. Doctors use tests that examine the liver and the blood to diagnose liver cancer. Treatment options include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or liver transplantation . NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. There are many kinds of liver diseases: Diseases caused by  viruses, such as hepatitis A , hepatitis B , and hepatitis C Diseases caused by drugs, poisons, or too much alcohol. Examples include fatty liver disease and cirrhosis . Liver cancer Inherited diseases, such as hemochromatosis and Wilson disease Symptoms of liver disease can vary, but they often include swelling of the abdomen and legs, bruising easily, changes in the color of your stool and urine, and jaundice , or yellowing of the skin and eyes. Sometimes there are no symptoms. Tests such as imaging tests and liver function tests can check for liver damage and help to diagnose liver diseases.

Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. You cannot live without a liver that works. If your liver fails, your doctor may put you on a waiting list for a liver transplant. Doctors do liver transplants when other treatment cannot keep a damaged liver working. During a liver transplantation, the surgeon removes the diseased liver and replaces it with a healthy one. Most transplant livers come from a donor who has died.  Sometimes there is a living donor.  This is when a healthy person donates part of his or her liver for a specific patient. The most common reason for a transplant in adults is cirrhosis . This is scarring of the liver, caused by injury or long-term disease. The most common reason in children is biliary atresia, a disease of the bile ducts . If you have a transplant, you must take drugs the rest of your life to help keep your body from rejecting the new liver. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your small intestine does most of the digesting of the foods you eat. If you have a malabsorption syndrome, your small intestine cannot absorb nutrients from foods. Causes of malabsorption syndromes include: Celiac disease Lactose intolerance Short bowel syndrome. This happens after surgery to remove half or more of the small intestine. You might need the surgery if you have a problem with the small intestine from a disease, injury, or birth defect. Whipple disease, a rare bacterial infection Genetic diseases Certain medicines Symptoms of different malabsorption syndromes can vary.  They often include chronic diarrhea, abnormal stools, weight loss, and gas. Your doctor may use lab, imaging, or other tests to make a diagnosis. Treatment of malabsorption syndromes depends on the cause.

What are nausea and vomiting? Nausea is when you feel sick to your stomach, as if you are going to throw up. Vomiting is when you throw up. What causes nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting can be symptoms of many different conditions, including: Morning sickness during pregnancy Gastroenteritis (infection of your intestines) and other infections Migraines Motion sickness Food poisoning Medicines, including those for cancer chemotherapy GERD (reflux) and ulcers Intestinal obstruction When do I need to see a health care provider for nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting are common. They are usually not serious. However, you should contact your health care provider immediately if you have: A reason to think that your vomiting is from poisoning Vomited for longer than 24 hours Blood in the vomit Severe abdominal pain Severe headache and stiff neck Signs of dehydration , such as dry mouth, infrequent urination or dark urine How is the cause of nausea and vomiting diagnosed? Your health care provider will take your medical history, ask about your symptoms and do a physical exam. The provider will look for signs of dehydration. You may have some tests, including blood and urine tests. Women may also have a pregnancy test. What are the treatments for nausea and vomiting? Treatments for nausea and vomiting depend on the cause. You may get treatment for the underlying problem. There are some medicines that can treatment nausea and vomiting. For severe cases of vomiting, you may need extra fluids through an IV (intravenous). There are things that you can do to feel better: Get enough fluids, to avoid dehydration. If you are having trouble keeping liquids down, drink small amounts of clear liquids often. Eat bland foods; stay away from spicy, fatty, or salty foods Eat smaller meals more often Avoid strong smells, since they can sometimes trigger nausea and vomiting If you are pregnant and have morning sickness, eat crackers before you get out of bed in the morning

An ostomy is surgery to create an opening (stoma) from an area inside the body to the outside. It treats certain diseases of the digestive or urinary systems. It can be permanent, when an organ must be removed.  It can be temporary, when the organ needs time to heal.  The organ could be the small intestine, colon, rectum, or bladder. With an ostomy, there must be a new way for wastes to leave the body. There are many different types of ostomy. Some examples are: Ileostomy - the bottom of the small intestine (ileum) is attached to the stoma. This bypasses the colon, rectum and anus. Colostomy - the colon is attached to the stoma. This bypasses the rectum and the anus. Urostomy - the tubes that carry urine to the bladder are attached to the stoma. This bypasses the bladder. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces the juices that help break down food and the hormones that help control blood sugar levels. A pancreas transplant is surgery to place a healthy pancreas from a donor into a person with a diseased pancreas.  It is mostly done for people with severe type 1 diabetes . It can allow them to give up insulin shots.  An experimental procedure called islet cell transplantation transplants only the parts of the pancreas that make insulin. People who have transplants must take drugs to keep their body from rejecting the new pancreas for the rest of their lives. They must also have regular follow-up care. Because of the risks, it is not a common treatment for type 1 diabetes.

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces the juices that help break down food and the hormones that help control blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer usually begins in the cells that produce the juices. Some risk factors for developing pancreatic cancer include: Smoking Long-term diabetes Chronic pancreatitis Certain hereditary disorders Pancreatic cancer is hard to catch early. It doesn't cause symptoms right away. When you do get symptoms, they are often vague or you may not notice them. They include yellowing of the skin and eyes, pain in the abdomen and back, weight loss and fatigue. Also, because the pancreas is hidden behind other organs, health care providers cannot see or feel the tumors during routine exams. Doctors use a physical exam, blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to diagnose it. Because it is often found late and it spreads quickly, pancreatic cancer can be hard to treat.  Possible treatments include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces juices that help break down food and hormones that help control blood sugar levels. Problems with the pancreas can lead to many health problems. These include: Pancreatitis , or inflammation of the pancreas: This happens when digestive enzymes start digesting the pancreas itself Pancreatic cancer Cystic fibrosis , a genetic disorder in which thick, sticky mucus can also block tubes in your pancreas The pancreas also plays a role in diabetes. In type 1 diabetes , the beta cells of the pancreas no longer make insulin because the body's immune system has attacked them. In type 2 diabetes , the pancreas loses the ability to secrete enough insulin in response to meals.

The pancreas is a large gland behind the stomach and close to the first part of the small intestine. It secretes digestive juices into the small intestine through a tube called the pancreatic duct. The pancreas also releases the hormones insulin and glucagon into the bloodstream. Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas. It happens when digestive enzymes start digesting the pancreas itself. Pancreatitis can be acute or chronic. Either form is serious and can lead to complications. Acute pancreatitis occurs suddenly and usually goes away in a few days with treatment. It is often caused by gallstones .  Common symptoms are severe pain in the upper abdomen, nausea, and vomiting.   Treatment is usually a few days in the hospital for intravenous (IV) fluids, antibiotics, and medicines to relieve pain. Chronic pancreatitis does not heal or improve. It gets worse over time and leads to permanent damage. The most common cause is heavy alcohol use . Other causes include cystic fibrosis and other inherited disorders, high levels of calcium or fats in the blood, some medicines, and autoimmune conditions . Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, weight loss, and oily stools. Treatment may also be a few days in the hospital for intravenous (IV) fluids, medicines to relieve pain, and nutritional support. After that, you may need to start taking enzymes and eat a special diet.  It is also important to not smoke or drink alcohol. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A peptic ulcer is a sore in the lining of your stomach or your duodenum, the first part of your small intestine. A burning stomach pain is the most common symptom. The pain: Starts between meals or during the night Briefly stops if you eat or take antacids Lasts for minutes to hours Comes and goes for several days or weeks Peptic ulcers happen when the acids that help you digest food damage the walls of the stomach or duodenum. The most common cause is infection with a bacterium called Helicobacter pylori . Another cause is the long-term use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medicines (NSAIDs) such as aspirin and ibuprofen. Stress and spicy foods do not cause ulcers, but can make them worse. To see if you have an H. pylori infection, your doctor will test your blood, breath, or stool. Your doctor also may look inside your stomach and duodenum by doing an endoscopy or x-ray. Peptic ulcers will get worse if not treated. Treatment may include medicines to reduce stomach acids or antibiotics to kill H. pylori. Antacids and milk can't heal peptic ulcers. Not smoking and avoiding alcohol can help. You may need surgery if your ulcers don't heal. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

The rectum is the lower part of your large intestine where your body stores stool. Problems with rectum are common. They include hemorrhoids , abscesses, incontinence and cancer . Many people are embarrassed to talk about rectal troubles. But seeing your doctor about problems in this area is important. This is especially true if you have pain or bleeding. Treatments vary depending on the particular problem. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What are reflux (GER) and GERD? The esophagus is the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. If your child has reflux, his or her stomach contents come back up into the esophagus. Another name for reflux is gastroesophageal reflux (GER). GERD stands for gastroesophageal reflux disease. It is a more serious and long-lasting type of reflux. If your child has reflux more than twice a week for a few weeks, it could be GERD. What causes reflux and GERD in children? There is a muscle (the lower esophageal sphincter) that acts as a valve between the esophagus and stomach. When your child swallows, this muscle relaxes to let food pass from the esophagus to the stomach. This muscle normally stays closed, so the stomach contents don't flow back into the esophagus. In children who have reflux and GERD, this muscle becomes weak or relaxes when it shouldn't, and the stomach contents flow back into the esophagus. This can happen because of: A hiatal hernia , a condition in which the upper part of your stomach pushes upward into your chest through an opening in your diaphragm Increased pressure on the abdomen from being overweight or having obesity Medicines, such as certain asthma medicines, antihistamines (which treat allergies), pain relievers , sedatives (which help put people to sleep), and antidepressants Smoking or exposure to secondhand smoke A previous surgery on the esophagus or upper abdomen A severe developmental delay Certain neurological conditions , such as cerebral palsy How common are reflux and GERD in children? Many children have occasional reflux. GERD is not as common; up to 25% of children have symptoms of GERD. What are the symptoms of reflux and GERD in children? Your child might not even notice reflux. But some children taste food or stomach acid at the back of the mouth. In children, GERD can cause: Heartburn , a painful, burning feeling in the middle of the chest. It is more common in older children (12 years and up). Bad breath Nausea and vomiting Problems swallowing or painful swallowing Breathing problems The wearing away of teeth How do doctors diagnose reflux and GERD in children? In most cases, a doctor diagnoses reflux by reviewing your child's symptoms and medical history. If the symptoms do not get better with lifestyle changes and anti-reflux medicines, your child may need testing to check for GERD or other problems. Several tests can help a doctor diagnose GERD. Sometimes doctors order more than one test to get a diagnosis. Commonly-used tests include: Upper GI series , which looks at the shape of your child's upper GI (gastrointestinal) tract. You child will drink a contrast liquid called barium. For young children, the barium is mixed in with a bottle or other food. The health care professional will take several x-rays of your child to track the barium as it goes through the esophagus and stomach. Esophageal pH and impedance monitoring , which measures the amount of acid or liquid in your child's esophagus. A doctor or nurse places a thin flexible tube through your child's nose into the stomach. The end of the tube in the esophagus measures when and how much acid comes back up into the esophagus. The other end of the tube attaches to a monitor that records the measurements. Your child will wear the tube for 24 hours. He or she may need to stay in the hospital during the test. Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy and biopsy , which uses an endoscope, a long, flexible tube with a light and camera at the end of it. The doctor runs the endoscope down your child's esophagus, stomach, and first part of the small intestine. While looking at the pictures from the endoscope, the doctor may also take tissue samples ( biopsy ). What lifestyle changes can help treat my child's reflux or GERD? Sometimes reflux and GERD in children can be treated with lifestyle changes: Losing weight, if needed Eating smaller meals Avoiding high-fat foods Wearing loose-fitting clothing around the abdomen Staying upright for 3 hours after meals and not reclining and slouching when sitting Sleeping at a slight angle. Raise the head of your child's bed 6 to 8 inches by safely putting blocks under the bedposts. What treatments might the doctor give for my child's GERD? If changes at home do not help enough, the doctor may recommend medicines to treat GERD. The medicines work by lowering the amount of acid in your child's stomach. Some medicines for GERD in children are over-the-counter, and some are prescription medicines. They include: Over-the-counter antacids H2 blockers, which decrease acid production Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which lower the amount of acid the stomach makes Prokinetics, which help the stomach empty faster If these don't help and your child still has severe symptoms, then surgery might be an option. A pediatric gastroenterologist, a doctor who treats children who have digestive diseases, would do the surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What are reflux (GER) and GERD? The esophagus is the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. If your baby has reflux, his or her stomach contents come back up into the esophagus. Another name for reflux is gastroesophageal reflux (GER). GERD stands for gastroesophageal reflux disease. It is a more serious and long-lasting type of reflux. Babies may have GERD if their symptoms prevent them from feeding or if the reflux lasts more than 12 to 14 months. What causes reflux and GERD in infants? There is a muscle (the lower esophageal sphincter) that acts as a valve between the esophagus and stomach. When your baby swallows, this muscle relaxes to let food pass from the esophagus to the stomach. This muscle normally stays closed, so the stomach contents don't flow back into the esophagus. In babies who have reflux, the lower esophageal sphincter muscle is not fully developed and lets the stomach contents back up the esophagus. This causes your baby to spit up (regurgitate). Once his or her sphincter muscle fully develops, your baby should no longer spit up. In babies who have GERD, the sphincter muscle becomes weak or relaxes when it shouldn't. How common are reflux and GERD in infants? Reflux is very common in babies. About half all babies spit up many times a day in the first 3 months of their lives. They usually stop spitting up between the ages of 12 and 14 months. GERD is also common in younger infants. Many 4-month-olds have it. But by their first birthday, only 10% of babies still have GERD. What are the symptoms of reflux and GERD in infants? In babies, the main symptom of reflux and GERD is spitting up. GERD may also cause symptoms such as: Arching of the back, often during or right after eating Colic - crying that lasts for more than 3 hours a day with no medical cause Coughing Gagging or trouble swallowing Irritability, especially after eating Poor eating or refusing to eat Poor weight gain, or weight loss Wheezing or trouble breathing Forceful or frequent vomiting NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases How do doctors diagnose reflux and GERD in infants? In most cases, a doctor diagnoses reflux by reviewing your baby's symptoms and medical history. If the symptoms do not get better with feeding changes and anti-reflux medicines, your baby may need testing. Several tests can help a doctor diagnose GERD. Sometimes doctors order more than one test to get a diagnosis. Common tests include: Upper GI series , which looks at the shape of your baby's upper GI (gastrointestinal) tract. Your baby will drink or eat a contrast liquid called barium. The barium is mixed in with a bottle or other food. The health care professional will take several x-rays of your baby to track the barium as it goes through the esophagus and stomach. Esophageal pH and impedance monitoring , which measures the amount of acid or liquid in your baby's esophagus. A doctor or nurse places a thin flexible tube through your baby's nose into the stomach. The end of the tube in the esophagus measures when and how much acid comes up into the esophagus. The other end of the tube attaches to a monitor that records the measurements. Your baby will wear this for 24 hours, most likely in the hospital. Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy and biopsy , which uses an endoscope, a long, flexible tube with a light and camera at the end of it. The doctor runs the endoscope down your baby's esophagus, stomach, and first part of the small intestine. While looking at the pictures from the endoscope, the doctor may also take tissue samples ( biopsy ). What feeding changes can help treat my infant's reflux or GERD? Feeding changes may help your baby's reflux and GERD: Add rice cereal to your baby's bottle of formula or breastmilk. Check with the doctor about how much to add. If the mixture is too thick, you can change the nipple size or cut a little "x" in the nipple to make the opening larger. Burp your baby after every 1 to 2 ounces of formula. If you breastfeed, burp your baby after nursing from each breast. Avoid overfeeding; give your baby the amount of formula or breast milk recommended. Hold your baby upright for 30 minutes after feedings. If you use formula and your doctor thinks that your baby may be sensitive to milk protein, your doctor may suggest switching to a different type of formula. Do not change formulas without talking to the doctor. What treatments might the doctor give for my infant's GERD? If feeding changes do not help enough, the doctor may recommend medicines to treat GERD. The medicines work by lowering the amount of acid in your baby's stomach. The doctor will only suggest medicine if your baby still has regular GERD symptoms and: You already tried some feeding changes Your baby has problems sleeping or feeding Your baby does not grow properly The doctor will often prescribe a medicine on a trial basis and will explain any possible complications. You shouldn't give your baby any medicines unless the doctor tells you to. Medicines for GERD in babies include: H2 blockers, which decrease acid production Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which lower the amount of acid the stomach makes If these don't help and your baby still has severe symptoms, then surgery might be an option. Pediatric gastroenterologists only use surgery to treat GERD in babies in rare cases. They may suggest surgery when babies have severe breathing problems or have a physical problem that causes GERD symptoms.

Your small intestine is the longest part of your digestive system - about twenty feet long!  It connects your stomach to your large intestine (or colon) and folds many times to fit inside your abdomen. Your small intestine does most of the digesting of the foods you eat.  It has three areas called the duodenum, the ileum, and the jejunum. Problems with the small intestine can include: Bleeding Celiac disease Crohn's disease Infections Intestinal cancer Intestinal obstruction Irritable bowel syndrome Ulcers, such as peptic ulcer Treatment of disorders of the small intestine depends on the cause.

The stomach is an organ between the esophagus and the small intestine. It mixes food with stomach acid and helps digest protein. Stomach cancer mostly affects older people - two-thirds of people who have it are over age 65. Your risk of getting it is also higher if you: Have had a Helicobacter pylori infection Have had stomach inflammation Are a man Eat lots of  salted, smoked, or pickled foods Smoke cigarettes Have a family history of stomach cancer It is hard to diagnose stomach cancer in its early stages. Indigestion and stomach discomfort can be symptoms of early cancer, but other problems can cause the same symptoms. In advanced cases, there may be blood in your stool, vomiting, unexplained weight loss, jaundice, or trouble swallowing. Doctors diagnose stomach cancer with a physical exam, blood and imaging tests, an endoscopy, and a biopsy. Because it is often found late, it can be hard to treat stomach cancer.  Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation or a combination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your stomach is an organ between your esophagus and small intestine. It is where digestion of protein begins. The stomach has three tasks. It stores swallowed food. It mixes the food with stomach acids. Then it sends the mixture on to the small intestine. Most people have a problem with their stomach at one time or another. Indigestion and heartburn are common problems. You can relieve some stomach problems with over-the-counter medicines and lifestyle changes, such as avoiding fatty foods or eating more slowly. Other problems like peptic ulcers or GERD require medical attention. You should see a doctor if you have any of the following: Blood when you have a bowel movement Severe abdominal pain Heartburn not relieved by antacids Unintended weight loss Ongoing vomiting or diarrhea NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

If you have a swallowing disorder, you may have difficulty or pain when swallowing. Some people cannot swallow at all. Others may have trouble swallowing liquids, foods, or saliva. This makes it hard to eat. Often, it can be difficult to take in enough calories and fluids to nourish your body. Anyone can have a swallowing disorder, but it is more common in older adults. It often happens because of other conditions, including: Nervous system disorders , such as Parkinson's disease and cerebral palsy Problems with your esophagus, including GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease) Stroke Head or spinal cord injury Cancer of the head, neck , or esophagus Medicines can help some people, while others may need surgery.  Swallowing treatment with a speech-language pathologist can help.  You may find it helpful to change your diet or hold your head or neck in a certain way when you eat. In very serious cases, people may need feeding tubes . NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a disease that causes inflammation and sores, called ulcers, in the lining of the rectum and colon. It is one of a group of diseases called inflammatory bowel disease. UC can happen at any age, but it usually starts between the ages of 15 and 30. It tends to run in families. The most common symptoms are pain in the abdomen and blood or pus in diarrhea. Other symptoms may include: Anemia Severe tiredness Weight loss Loss of appetite Bleeding from the rectum Sores on the skin Joint pain Growth failure in children About half of people with UC have mild symptoms. Doctors use blood tests, stool tests, colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, and imaging tests to diagnose UC. Several types of drugs can help control it. Some people have long periods of remission, when they are free of symptoms. In severe cases, doctors must remove the colon. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Weight loss surgery helps people with extreme obesity to lose weight. It may be an option if you cannot lose weight through diet and exercise or have serious health problems caused by obesity. There are different types of weight loss surgery.  They often limit the amount of food you can take in. Some types of surgery also affect how you digest food and absorb nutrients. All types have risks and complications, such as infections, hernias, and blood clots. Many people who have the surgery lose weight quickly, but regain some weight later on.  If you follow diet and exercise recommendations, you can keep most of the weight off. You will also need medical follow-up for the rest of your life. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

An acoustic neuroma is a benign tumor that develops on the nerve that connects the ear to the brain. The tumor usually grows slowly. As it grows, it presses against the hearing and balance nerves. At first, you may have no symptoms or mild symptoms. They can include: Loss of hearing on one side Ringing in ears Dizziness and balance problems The tumor can also eventually cause numbness or paralysis of the face. If it grows large enough, it can press against the brain, becoming life-threatening. Acoustic neuroma can be difficult to diagnose, because the symptoms are similar to those of middle ear problems.  Ear exams, hearing tests, and scans can show if you have it. If the tumor stays small, you may only need to have it checked regularly.  If you do need treatment, surgery and radiation are options. If the tumors affect both hearing nerves, it is often because of a genetic disorder called neurofibromatosis . NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Communication Disorders

An allergy is a reaction by your immune system to something that does not bother most other people. People who have allergies often are sensitive to more than one thing. Substances that often cause reactions are: Pollen Dust mites Mold spores Pet dander Food Insect stings Medicines Normally, your immune system fights germs. It is your body's defense system. In most allergic reactions, however, it is responding to a false alarm. Genes and the environment probably both play a role. Allergies can cause a variety of symptoms such as a runny nose, sneezing, itching, rashes , swelling, or asthma . Allergies can range from minor to severe. Anaphylaxis is a severe reaction that can be life-threatening.   Doctors use skin and blood tests to diagnose allergies. Treatments include medicines, allergy shots, and avoiding the substances that cause the reactions.

Have you ever felt dizzy , lightheaded, or as if the room is spinning around you? If the feeling happens often, it could be a sign of a balance problem. Balance problems can make you feel unsteady. You may also have blurred vision, confusion, and disorientation. They are one cause of falls and fall-related injuries, such as a hip fracture (broken hip). Some balance problems are due to problems in the inner ear. Others may involve another part of the body, such as the brain or the heart. Aging, infections, head injury, certain medicines, or problems with blood circulation may also cause balance problems. It is important to see your doctor about balance problems. They can be a sign of other health problems, such as an ear infection or a stroke. Your doctor may send you to a specialist for a diagnosis. You may need a hearing test, blood tests, or imaging studies of your head and brain. Other possible tests look at your eye movements, and how your body responds to movement. In some cases, treating the illness that is causing the disorder will help with the balance problem. Exercises, a change in diet, and some medicines also can help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

What is the common cold? The common cold is a mild infection of your upper respiratory tract (which includes your nose and throat). Colds are probably the most common illness. Adults have an average of 2-3 colds per year, and children have even more. Colds are more common in the winter and spring, but you can get them at any time. What causes the common cold? More than 200 different viruses can cause a cold, but rhinoviruses are the most common type. The viruses that cause colds are very contagious. They can spread from person to person through the air and close personal contact. You can also get infected when you touch something that has the virus on it and then touch your eyes, mouth, or nose. For example, you could get a cold after you shake hands with someone who has a cold or touch a doorknob that has the germs on it, and then touch your face. What are the symptoms of the common cold? The symptoms of a common cold usually include: Sneezing Stuffy nose (congestion) Runny nose Sore throat Coughing Headache The symptoms usually start a few days after you become infected with the virus. Some symptoms can last for 10-14 days. What are the treatments for the common cold? There is no cure for the common cold. But there are treatments that can make you feel better while you wait for the cold to go away on its own: Getting lots of rest. Drinking plenty of fluids. Using a clean humidifier or cool mist vaporizer. Gargling with warm salt water. Using saline nose drops or sprays. Taking over-the-counter pain or cold and cough medicines . But you need to be careful with certain medicines: Children and teens should not take aspirin. Some cold and cough medicines contain ingredients that are not recommended for children. Talk with your child's health care provider before giving your child any cold and cough medicines. Some cold and cough medicines contain pain relievers. If you also take a separate pain reliever with these medicines, you could be getting a dangerous amount of the pain reliever. Read the labels on the medicines and follow the instructions carefully. If you have questions, ask your provider or a pharmacist. Antibiotics will not help with a cold. Antibiotics help with bacterial infections, not with viral infections such as colds. Most people who have a cold will feel better after a week or two. However, some people who get a cold may develop other illnesses, such as bronchitis or pneumonia . This is more common in people with weakened immune systems, asthma , or other respiratory conditions. Contact your provider if you or your child have symptoms that concern you, such as: Trouble breathing or fast breathing Dehydration Fever that lasts longer than 4 days Symptoms that last more than 10 days without improvement Symptoms, such as fever or cough, that improve but then return or worsen Worsening of chronic medical conditions Can the common cold be prevented? There is no vaccine to protect against the common cold. But you may be able to reduce your risk of getting or spreading a cold by: Washing your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. Avoiding touching your face, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. Avoiding close contact, such as kissing, shaking hands, and sharing cups and eating utensils, with others if you are sick or they are sick. Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch. Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue. Then throw away the tissue and wash your hands. Staying home when sick. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Coughing is a reflex that keeps your throat and airways clear.  Although it can be annoying, coughing helps your body heal or protect itself. Coughs can be either acute or chronic.  Acute coughs begin suddenly and usually last no more than 2 to 3 weeks.  Acute coughs are the kind you most often get with a cold , flu , or acute bronchitis .  Chronic coughs last longer than 2 to 3 weeks.  Causes of chronic cough include: Chronic bronchitis Asthma Allergies COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease) Smoking Throat disorders , such as croup in young children Some medicines Water can help ease your cough - whether you drink it or add it to the air with a steamy shower or vaporizer. If you have a cold or the flu, antihistamines may work better than non-prescription cough medicines .   Children under four should not have cough medicine.  For children over four, use caution and read labels carefully.

Diphtheria is a serious bacterial infection. You can catch it from a person who has the infection and coughs or sneezes. You can also get infected by coming in contact with an object, such as a toy, that has bacteria on it. Diphtheria usually affects the nose and throat. Symptoms include: Sore throat Swollen glands in the neck Fever Weakness Your doctor will diagnose it based on your signs and symptoms and a lab test. Getting treatment for diphtheria quickly is important. If your doctor suspects that you have it, you'll start treatment before the lab tests come back. Treatment is with antibiotics. The diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus vaccine can prevent diphtheria, but its protection does not last forever.  Children need another dose, or booster, at about age 12.  Then, as adults, they should get a booster every 10 years. Diphtheria is very rare in the United States because of the vaccine. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

When you're dizzy, you may feel lightheaded, woozy, or disoriented. If you feel like you or the room are spinning, you have vertigo. These feelings may make you lose your balance . Dizziness can have many different causes. A sudden drop in blood pressure or being dehydrated can make you dizzy. Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down. Certain medicines and problems with your inner ear may cause dizziness. So can motion sickness . Sometimes dizziness can be a symptom of other disorders. As people get older, they may have more health problems and take more medicines. This makes them more likely to have problems with dizziness and balance. Dizziness usually gets better by itself or is easily treated. If you are dizzy often, you should see your health care provider to find the cause. NIH: National Institutes of Health

Your ear has three main parts: outer, middle and inner. You use all of them in hearing. Sound waves come in through your outer ear. They reach your middle ear, where they make your eardrum vibrate. The vibrations are transmitted through three tiny bones, called ossicles, in your middle ear. The vibrations travel to your inner ear, a snail-shaped organ. The inner ear makes the nerve impulses that are sent to the brain. Your brain recognizes them as sounds. The inner ear also controls balance. A variety of conditions may affect your hearing or balance : Ear infections are the most common illness in infants and young children. Tinnitus , a roaring in your ears, can be the result of loud noises, medicines or a variety of other causes. Meniere's disease may be the result of fluid problems in your inner ear; its symptoms include tinnitus and dizziness. Ear barotrauma is an injury to your ear because of changes in barometric (air) or water pressure. Some ear disorders can result in hearing disorders and deafness .

Ear infections are the most common reason parents bring their child to a doctor. Three out of four children will have at least one ear infection by their third birthday.  Adults can also get ear infections, but they are less common. The infection usually affects the middle ear and is called otitis media. The tubes inside the ears become clogged with fluid and mucus. This can affect hearing, because sound cannot get through all that fluid. If your child isn't old enough to say "My ear hurts," here are a few things to look for: Tugging at ears Crying more than usual Fluid draining from the ear Trouble sleeping Balance difficulties Hearing problems Your health care provider will diagnose an ear infection by looking inside the ear with an instrument called an otoscope. Often, ear infections go away on their own. Your health care provider may recommend pain relievers. Severe infections and infections in young babies may require antibiotics. Children who get infections often may need surgery to place small tubes inside their ears. The tubes relieve pressure in the ears so that the child can hear again. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Each spring, summer, and fall, trees, weeds, and grasses release tiny pollen grains into the air. Some of the pollen ends up in your nose and throat. This can trigger a type of allergy called hay fever. Symptoms can include: Sneezing, often with a runny or clogged nose Coughing and postnasal drip Itching eyes, nose and throat Red and watery eyes Dark circles under the eyes Your health care provider may diagnose hay fever based on a physical exam and your symptoms. Sometimes skin or blood tests are used. Taking medicines and using nasal sprays can relieve symptoms. You can also rinse out your nose, but be sure to use distilled or sterilized water with saline. Allergy shots can help make you less sensitive to pollen and provide long-term relief.

What is head and neck cancer? Head and neck cancer is the name for cancers that develop in the mouth , nose and sinuses , salivary glands , and throat and voice box (larynx). Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell cancers . They begin in the moist tissues that line the head and neck. The cancer cells may spread into deeper tissue as the cancer grows. There are other cancers that develop in the head and neck, such as brain cancer , eye cancer , and esophageal cancer . But they are usually not considered to be head and neck cancers, because those types of cancer and their treatments are different. Who is more likely to develop head and neck cancer? Anyone can get head and neck cancer, but you are more likely to develop it if you: Use tobacco or drink lots of alcohol. Your risk of developing head and neck cancer is even higher if you do both. Are male. Are over age 50. Have a history of head or neck cancer. Have HPV (for cancers in the tonsils and base of the tongue). Are exposed to wood dusts or certain other toxic substances at work (for upper throat, nose, and sinus cancers). Have had radiation exposure to the head and neck (for salivary gland cancer). Have Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection (for upper throat and salivary gland cancers). Are Asian (for upper throat cancer). What are the symptoms of head and neck cancer? The symptoms of head and neck cancer may include: A lump in the neck A sore in the mouth or the throat that does not heal and may be painful A sore throat that does not go away Trouble swallowing A change or hoarseness in the voice Other possible symptoms can depend on the specific type of head and neck cancer. How is head and neck cancer diagnosed? Which exams and tests used to diagnose head and neck cancer can depend on the specific type of cancer. Possible exams and tests may include: A physical exam of the area that might have cancer. Blood and/or urine tests. An endoscopy . A biopsy or other procedure to collect cells from the area that might have cancer. The cells are viewed under a microscope to find out if they are abnormal. Imaging tests . What are the treatments for head and neck cancer? The treatment for head and neck cancer will depend on the specific type of cancer, the stage (how advanced the cancer is), your overall health, and other factors. The treatment options might include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Cancer immunotherapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells In some cases, you may need a combination of treatments. Sometimes surgery can affect how well you can chew, swallow, or talk. Rehabilitation, such as physical therapy, dietary counseling, and speech therapy, may help. Can head and neck cancer be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent head and neck cancer: Not smoking Limiting alcohol use or not drinking at all Getting regular dental exams Talking to your provider about HPV vaccination NIH: National Cancer Institute

It's frustrating to be unable to hear well enough to enjoy talking with friends or family. Hearing disorders make it hard, but not impossible, to hear. They can often be helped. Deafness can keep you from hearing sound at all. What causes hearing loss? Some possibilities are: Heredity Diseases such as ear infections and meningitis Trauma Certain medicines Long-term exposure to loud noise Aging There are two main types of hearing loss. One happens when your inner ear or auditory nerve is damaged. This type is usually permanent. The other kind happens when sound waves cannot reach your inner ear. Earwax buildup, fluid, or a punctured eardrum can cause it. Treatment or surgery can often reverse this kind of hearing loss. Untreated, hearing problems can get worse. If you have trouble hearing, you can get help. Possible treatments include hearing aids , cochlear implants , special training, certain medicines, and surgery. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Most children hear and listen from the moment they are born. They learn to talk by imitating the sounds around them and the voices of their parents and caregivers. But about 2 or 3 out of every 1,000 children in the United States are born deaf or hard-of-hearing. More lose their hearing later during childhood. Babies should have a hearing screening before they are a month old. If your child has a hearing loss, it is important to consider the use of hearing devices and other communication options by age 6 months. That's because children start learning speech and language long before they talk. Hearing problems can be temporary or permanent. Sometimes, ear infections , injuries or diseases affect hearing. If your child does not hear well, get help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Meniere's disease is a disorder of the inner ear. It can cause severe dizziness , a roaring sound in your ears called tinnitus , hearing loss that comes and goes and the feeling of ear pressure or pain. It usually affects just one ear. It is a common cause of hearing loss. Attacks of dizziness may come on suddenly or after a short period of tinnitus or muffled hearing. Some people have single attacks of dizziness once in a while. Others may have many attacks close together over several days. Some people with Meniere's disease have "drop attacks" during which the  dizziness is so bad they lose their balance and fall. Scientists don't yet know the cause. They think that it has to do with the fluid levels or the mixing of fluids in the canals of your inner ear.  Doctors diagnose it based on a physical exam and your symptoms. A hearing test can check to see how it has affected your hearing. There is no cure. Treatments include medicines to control dizziness, limiting salt in your diet, and taking water pills. A device that fits into the outer ear and delivers air pulses to the middle ear can help. Severe cases may require surgery. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Your paranasal sinuses are small hollow spaces around the nose. They are lined with cells that make mucus, which keeps your nose from drying out. The nasal cavity is the passageway just behind your nose. Air passes through it on the way to your throat as you breathe. Cancer of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses is rare.  You are at greater risk if you are: Male and over 40 years old Exposed to certain workplace chemicals Infected with HPV A smoker There may be no symptoms at first, and later symptoms can be like those of infections. Doctors diagnose nasal cancer with imaging tests, lighted tube-like instruments that look inside the nose, and biopsies. Treatment options include surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Noise is all around you, from televisions and radios to lawn mowers and washing machines.  Normally, you hear these sounds at safe levels that don't affect hearing. But sounds that are too loud or loud sounds over a long time are harmful.  They can damage sensitive structures of the inner ear and cause noise-induced hearing loss. More than 30 million Americans are exposed to hazardous sound levels on a regular basis.  Hazardous sound levels are louder than 80 decibels. That's not as loud as traffic on a busy street. Listening to loud music, especially on headphones, is a common cause of noise-induced hearing loss.  You can protect your hearing by: Keeping the volume down when listening to music Wearing earplugs when using loud equipment NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Your nose is important to your health. It filters the air you breathe, removing dust, germs, and irritants. It warms and moistens the air to keep your lungs and tubes that lead to them from drying out. Your nose also contains the nerve cells that help your sense of smell. When there is a problem with your nose, your whole body can suffer. For example, the stuffy nose of the common cold can make it hard for you to breathe, sleep, or get comfortable. Many problems besides the common cold can affect the nose. They include: Deviated septum - a shifting of the wall that divides the nasal cavity into halves Nasal polyps - soft growths that develop on the lining of your nose or sinuses Nosebleeds Rhinitis - inflammation of the nose and sinuses sometimes caused by allergies . The main symptom is a runny nose. Nasal fractures, also known as a broken nose

Sinusitis means your sinuses are inflamed. The cause can be an infection or another problem. Your sinuses are hollow air spaces within the bones surrounding the nose. They produce mucus, which drains into the nose.  If your nose is swollen, this can block the sinuses and cause pain. There are several types of sinusitis, including: Acute, which lasts up to 4 weeks Subacute, which lasts 4 to 12 weeks Chronic, which lasts more than 12 weeks and can continue for months or even years Recurrent, with several attacks within a year Acute sinusitis often starts as a cold, which then turns into a bacterial infection.  Allergies, nasal problems, and certain diseases can also cause acute and chronic sinusitis. Symptoms of sinusitis can include fever, weakness, fatigue, cough, and congestion. There may also be mucus drainage in the back of the throat, called postnasal drip. Your health care professional diagnoses sinusitis based on your symptoms and an examination of your nose and face. You may also need imaging tests. Treatments include antibiotics, decongestants, and pain relievers. Using heat pads on the inflamed area, saline nasal sprays, and vaporizers can also help.

Your throat is a tube that carries food to your esophagus and air to your windpipe and larynx (also called the voice box). The technical name for the throat is pharynx. You can have a sore throat for many reasons.  Often, colds and flu cause sore throats.  Other causes can include: Allergies Mononucleosis Smoking Strep throat Tonsillitis Treatment depends on the cause.  Sucking on lozenges, drinking lots of liquids, and gargling may ease the pain.  Over-the-counter pain relievers can also help, but children should not take aspirin.

Strep is short for Streptococcus, a type of bacteria. There are several types. Two of them cause most of the strep infections in people: group A and group B. Group A strep causes: Strep throat - a sore, red throat. Your tonsils may be swollen and have white spots on them. Scarlet fever - an illness that follows strep throat. It causes a red rash on the body. Impetigo - a skin infection Toxic shock syndrome Cellulitis and necrotizing fasciitis (flesh-eating disease) Group B strep can cause blood infections, pneumonia and meningitis in newborns. A screening test during pregnancy can tell if you have it. If you do, intravenous (IV) antibiotics during labor can save your baby's life.  Adults can also get group B strep infections, especially if they are 65 or older or already have health problems. Strep B can cause urinary tract infections, blood infections, skin infections and pneumonia in adults. Antibiotics are used to treat strep infections.

Our senses of taste and smell give us great pleasure. Taste helps us enjoy food and beverages. Smell lets us enjoy the scents and fragrances like roses or coffee. Taste and smell also protect us, letting us know when food has gone bad or when there is a gas leak. They make us want to eat, ensuring we get the nutrition we need. People with taste disorders may taste things that aren't there, may not be able to tell the difference in tastes, or can't taste at all. People with smell disorders may lose their sense of smell, or things may smell different.  A smell they once enjoyed may now smell bad to them. Many illnesses and injuries can cause taste and smell disorders, including colds and head injuries. Some drugs can also affect taste and smell. Most people lose some ability to taste and smell as they get older. Treatment varies, depending on the problem and its cause. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Throat cancer is a type of head and neck cancer . Throat cancer has different names, depending on which part of the throat is affected. The different parts of your throat are called the oropharynx, the hypopharynx, the nasopharynx, and the larynx, or voice box. The main risk factors for throat cancer are using tobacco heavy drinking. Certain types of throat cancer also have other risk factors. For example, having HPV is a risk factor for oropharyngeal cancer. Symptoms of throat cancer may include: A sore throat that does not go away A lump in the neck Pain or ringing in the ears Trouble swallowing Ear pain To diagnose throat cancers, doctors may do a physical exam and history, imaging tests, and a biopsy. You may also need other tests, depending on the type of cancer. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Treatment for some types of throat cancer may also include targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your throat is a tube that carries food to your esophagus and air to your windpipe and larynx. The technical name for your throat is the pharynx. Throat problems are common. You've probably had a sore throat . The cause is usually a viral infection, but other causes include allergies, infection with strep bacteria or the leaking of stomach acids back up into the esophagus, called GERD . Other problems that affect the throat include: Tonsillitis - inflammation of the tonsils Cancer Croup - inflammation, usually in small children, which causes a barking cough Laryngitis - swelling of the voice box, which can cause a hoarse voice or loss of voice Most throat problems are minor and go away on their own. Treatments, when needed, depend on the problem.

Tinnitus is often described as a ringing in the ears. It also can sound like roaring, clicking, hissing, or buzzing. It may be soft or loud, high pitched or low pitched. You might hear it in either one or both ears. Millions of Americans have tinnitus. People with severe tinnitus may have trouble hearing, working or even sleeping. Causes of tinnitus include: Hearing loss in older people Exposure to loud noises Ear and sinus infections Heart or blood vessel problems Meniere's disease Brain tumors Hormonal changes in women Thyroid problems Certain medicines Treatment depends on the cause.  Treatments may include hearing aids, sound-masking devices, medicines, and ways to learn how to cope with the noise. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Your adrenal glands are just above your kidneys. The outside layer of these glands makes hormones that help your body respond to stress and regulate your blood pressure and water and salt balance.  Addison disease happens if the adrenal glands don't make enough of these hormones. A problem with your immune system usually causes Addison disease. The immune system mistakenly attacks your own tissues, damaging your adrenal glands. Other causes include infections and cancer. Symptoms include: Weight loss Muscle weakness Fatigue that gets worse over time Low blood pressure Patchy or dark skin Lab tests can confirm that you have Addison disease.  If you don't treat it, it can be fatal. You will need to take hormone pills for the rest of your life.  If you have Addison disease, you should carry an emergency ID. It should say that you have the disease, list your medicines and say how much you need in an emergency. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your adrenal, or suprarenal, glands are located on the top of each kidney. These glands produce hormones that you can't live without, including sex hormones and cortisol, which helps you respond to stress and has many other functions. A number of disorders can affect the adrenal glands , including tumors.   Tumors can be either benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer. Malignant ones are. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign.  They usually do not cause symptoms and may not require treatment. Malignant adrenal gland cancers are uncommon. Types of tumors include: Adrenocortical carcinoma - cancer in the outer part of the gland Neuroblastoma , a type of childhood cancer Pheochromocytoma - a rare tumor that is usually benign Symptoms depend on the type of cancer you have. Treatments may include surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy.

What are adrenal glands? Your adrenal glands are two small organs that sit on top of each kidney. The adrenal glands make different types of hormones you need to stay alive and healthy. Hormones are chemicals that travel in your bloodstream and control how different parts of your body work. The adrenal glands make the hormones cortisol, aldosterone, adrenaline, and noradrenaline. They also make hormones that your body uses to make sex hormones (estrogen and testosterone). All of these hormones do many important jobs, including: Turning food into energy and managing blood sugar levels Balancing salt and water Keeping blood pressure normal Responding to illness and stress (your "fight or flight" response) Timing when and how fast a child develops sexually Supporting pregnancy What are adrenal gland disorders? When you have an adrenal gland disorder, your body makes too much or too little of one or more hormones. The symptoms depend on the type of problem you have and how much it affects the hormone levels in your body. There are many types of adrenal gland disorders, including: Addison's Disease - a condition in which the adrenal glands don't make enough cortisol Cushing's Syndrome - a condition caused by too much cortisol in the body, often from taking steroid medicines for a long time Aldosterone-producing adenoma - a benign tumor (not cancer) that makes too much aldosterone and may cause serious high blood pressure Hereditary paraganglioma-pheochromocytoma - an inherited condition causing different types of tumors that make adrenaline and other hormones. Some tumors may become cancerous. Adrenal gland cancer - cancerous tumors, including adrenocortical carcinoma and neuroblastoma Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) - a group of inherited disorders in which the adrenal glands don't make enough cortisol. The most common type is 21-hydroxylase deficiency (also called CAH1) . In the United States, newborn babies get a blood test to see if they have CAH. People born with CAH may not have symptoms until childhood or later in life. What causes adrenal gland disorders? The cause of adrenal gland disorders depends on the type of disorder you have. Causes can include: Medicines such as steroids A problem in another gland, such as the pituitary gland . The pituitary gland releases hormones that affect how the adrenal glands work. Changes in genes (mutations). These changes can cause the adrenal glands to make too much or too little of one or more hormones. Infections In many cases the cause of the problem isn't clear. How are adrenal gland disorders diagnosed? Health care providers use different tests to check for adrenal disorders depending on your symptoms and health history.  For example, you may have tests of your blood, urine (pee), or saliva (spit).  These tests check your hormone levels. Your provider may order x-rays , CT scans , or MRI scans to look for tumors. What are the treatments for adrenal gland disorders? Different types of adrenal gland disorders have different treatments. They include medicines and surgery. Radiation therapy is sometimes a treatment for tumors. There are treatments to cure certain adrenal gland disorders. For other disorders, treatments can manage your symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy.  With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin.  With type 2 diabetes , the more common type, your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. You can also have prediabetes .  This means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes.  Having prediabetes puts you at a higher risk of getting type 2 diabetes. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious problems .    It can damage your eyes , kidneys , and nerves . Diabetes can also cause heart disease , stroke and even the need to remove a limb. Pregnant women can also get diabetes, called gestational diabetes . Blood tests can show if you have diabetes. One type of test, the A1C , can also check on how you are managing your diabetes. Exercise, weight control and sticking to your meal plan can help control your diabetes. You should also monitor your blood glucose level and take medicine if prescribed. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? If you have diabetes , your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from the foods you eat. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. What health problems can diabetes cause? Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause complications, including: Eye disease , due to changes in fluid levels, swelling in the tissues, and damage to the blood vessels in the eyes Foot problems , caused by damage to the nerves and reduced blood flow to your feet Gum disease and other dental problems, because a high amount of blood sugar in your saliva helps harmful bacteria grow in your mouth. The bacteria combine with food to form a soft, sticky film called plaque. Plaque also comes from eating foods that contain sugars or starches. Some types of plaque cause gum disease and bad breath . Other types cause tooth decay and cavities. Heart disease and stroke , caused by damage to your blood vessels and the nerves that control your heart and blood vessels Kidney disease , due to damage to the blood vessels in your kidneys. Many people with diabetes develop high blood pressure . That can also damage your kidneys. Nerve problems (diabetic neuropathy), caused by damage to the nerves and the small blood vessels that nourish your nerves with oxygen and nutrients Sexual and bladder problems, caused by damage to the nerves and reduced blood flow in the genitals and bladder Skin conditions , some of which are caused by changes in the small blood vessels and reduced circulation. People with diabetes are also more likely to have infections, including skin infections . What other problems can people with diabetes have? If you have diabetes, you need to watch out for blood sugar levels that are very high (hyperglycemia) or very low (hypoglycemia). These can happen quickly and can become dangerous. Some of the causes include having another illness or infection and certain medicines. They can also happen if you don't get the right amount of diabetes medicines . To try to prevent these problems, make sure to take your diabetes medicines correctly, follow your diabetic diet , and check your blood sugar regularly. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Until recently, the common type of diabetes in children and teens was type 1 . It was called juvenile diabetes. With Type 1 diabetes, the pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps glucose,or sugar, get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much sugar stays in the blood. Now younger people are also getting type 2 diabetes .  Type 2 diabetes used to be called adult-onset diabetes. But now it is becoming more common in children and teens, due to more obesity . With Type 2 diabetes, the body does not make or use insulin well. Children have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes if they  are overweight or have obesity, have a family history of diabetes, or are not active. Children who are African American, Hispanic, Native American/Alaska Native, Asian American, or Pacific Islander also have a higher risk. To lower the risk of type 2 diabetes in children: Have them maintain a healthy weight Be sure they are physically active Have them eat smaller portions of healthy foods Limit time with the TV, computer, and video Children and teens with type 1 diabetes may need to take insulin. Type 2 diabetes may be  controlled with diet and exercise . If not, patients will need to take oral diabetes medicines or insulin. A blood test called the A1C can check on how you are managing your diabetes.

Diabetes insipidus (DI) causes frequent urination. You become extremely thirsty, so you drink. Then you urinate. This cycle can keep you from sleeping or even make you wet the bed. Your body produces lots of urine that is almost all water. DI is different from diabetes mellitus (DM), which involves insulin problems and high blood sugar. The symptoms can be similar. However, DI is related to how your kidneys handle fluids. It's much less common than DM. Urine and blood tests can show which one you have. Usually, DI is caused by a problem with your pituitary gland or your kidneys. Treatment depends on the cause of the problem.  Medicines can often help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Diabetes means your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too 
high.  With type 1 diabetes, your pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that 
helps glucose get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much glucose 
stays in your blood.  Over time, high blood glucose can lead to serious problems with your heart , eyes , kidneys , nerves , and gums and teeth. Type 1 diabetes happens most often in children and young adults but can appear at any 
age. Symptoms may include: Being very thirsty Urinating often Feeling very hungry or tired Losing weight without trying Having sores that heal slowly Having dry, itchy skin Losing the feeling in your feet or having tingling in your feet Having blurry eyesight A blood test can show if you have diabetes. If you do, you will need to take insulin for 
the rest of your life. A blood test called the A1C can check to see how well you are managing your diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is type 2 diabetes? Type 2 diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose is your main source of energy. It comes from the foods you eat. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. If you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin or doesn't use insulin well. The glucose then stays in your blood and not enough goes into your cells. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . But you can take steps to manage your diabetes and try to prevent these health problems. What causes type 2 diabetes? Type 2 diabetes may be caused by a combination of factors: Being overweight or having obesity Not being physically active Genetics and family history Type 2 diabetes usually starts with insulin resistance. This is a condition in which your cells don't respond normally to insulin. As a result, your body needs more insulin to help the glucose enter your cells. At first, your body makes more insulin to try to get cells to respond. But over time, your body can't make enough insulin, and your blood glucose levels rise. Who is at risk for type 2 diabetes? You are at higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes if you: Are over age 45. Children, teenagers , and younger adults can get type 2 diabetes, but it is more common in middle-aged and older people. Have prediabetes , which means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes Had diabetes in pregnancy or gave birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more. Have a family history of diabetes Are overweight or have obesity Are Black or African American, Hispanic/Latino, American Indian, Asian American, or Pacific Islander Are not physically active Have other conditions such as high blood pressure , heart disease , stroke , polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), or depression Have low HDL (good) cholesterol and high triglycerides Have acanthosis nigricans - dark, thick, and velvety skin around your neck or armpits What are the symptoms of type 2 diabetes? Many people with type 2 diabetes have no symptoms at all. If you do have them, the symptoms develop slowly over several years. They might be so mild that you do not notice them. The symptoms can include: Increased thirst and urination Increased hunger Feeling tired Blurred vision Numbness or tingling in the feet or hands Sores that do not heal Unexplained weight loss How is type 2 diabetes diagnosed? Your health care provider will use blood tests to diagnose type 2 diabetes. The blood tests include: A1C test , which measures your average blood sugar level over the past 3 months Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, which measures your current blood sugar level. You need to fast (not eat or drink anything except water) for at least 8 hours before the test. Random plasma glucose (RPG) test, which measures your current blood sugar level. This test is used when you have diabetes symptoms and the provider does not want to wait for you to fast before having the test. What are the treatments for type 2 diabetes? Treatment for type 2 diabetes involves managing your blood sugar levels. Many people are able to do this by living a healthy lifestyle. Some people may also need to take medicine.: A healthy lifestyle includes following a healthy eating plan and getting regular physical activity . You need to learn how to balance what you eat and drink with physical activity and diabetes medicine, if you take any. Medicines for diabetes include oral medicines, insulin, and other injectable medicines. Over time, some people will need to take more than one type of medicine to control their diabetes. You will need to check your blood sugar regularly. Your health care provider will tell you how often you need to do it. It's also important to keep your blood pressure and cholesterol levels close to the targets your provider sets for you. Make sure to get your screening tests regularly. Can type 2 diabetes be prevented? You can take steps to help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by losing weight if you are overweight, eating fewer calories, and being more physically active. If you have a condition which raises your risk for type 2 diabetes, managing that condition may lower your risk of getting type 2 diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

People with dwarfism have short stature. This means that their height is under 4' 10" as an adult. They are usually of normal intelligence. Dwarfism most often does happen in families where both parents are of average height. More than 300 different conditions can cause dwarfism. Achondroplasia is the most common type of dwarfism. Achondroplasia is a genetic condition that affects about 1 in 15,000 to 1 in 40,000 people. It makes your arms and legs short in comparison to your head and trunk. You may also have a larger head and weak muscle tone. Other genetic conditions, kidney disease, and problems with metabolism or hormones can also cause dwarfism. The conditions that cause dwarfism can also cause other health problems. Most of them are treatable. It is important to have regular checkups throughout your life.  With proper medical care, most people with dwarfism have active lives and live as long as other people.

Your endocrine system includes eight major glands throughout your body. These glands make hormones . Hormones are chemical messengers.  They travel through your bloodstream to tissues or organs. Hormones work slowly and affect body processes from head to toe. These include: Growth and development Metabolism - digestion, elimination, breathing, blood circulation and maintaining body temperature Sexual function Reproduction Mood If your hormone levels are too high or too low, you may have a hormone disorder. Hormone diseases also occur if your body does not respond to hormones the way it is supposed to.  Stress, infection and changes in your blood's fluid and electrolyte balance can also influence hormone levels. In the United States, the most common endocrine disease is diabetes . There are many others. They are usually treated by controlling how much hormone your body makes. Hormone supplements can help if the problem is too little of a hormone.

Does your child seem much shorter - or much taller - than other kids his or her age? It could be normal. Some children may be small for their age but still be developing normally. Some children are short or tall because their parents are. But some children have growth disorders.  Growth disorders are problems that prevent children from developing normal height, weight, sexual maturity or other features. Very slow or very fast growth can sometimes signal a gland problem or disease. The pituitary gland makes growth hormone, which stimulates the growth of bone and other tissues. Children who have too little of it may be very short. Treatment with growth hormone can stimulate growth. People can also have too much growth hormone.  Usually the cause is a pituitary gland tumor, which is not cancer.  Too much growth hormone can cause gigantism in children, where their bones and their body grow too much.  In adults, it can cause acromegaly, which makes the hands, feet and face larger than normal. Possible treatments include surgery to remove the tumor, medicines, and radiation therapy.

Hormones are your body's chemical messengers. They travel in your bloodstream to tissues or organs. They work slowly, over time, and affect many different processes, including: Growth and development Metabolism - how your body gets energy from the foods you eat Sexual function Reproduction Mood Endocrine glands, which are special groups of cells, make hormones. The major endocrine glands are the pituitary, pineal, thymus, thyroid, adrenal glands, and pancreas. In addition, men produce hormones in their testes and women produce them in their ovaries. Hormones are powerful. It takes only a tiny amount to cause big changes in cells or even your whole body. That is why too much or too little of a certain hormone can be serious. Laboratory tests can measure the hormone levels in your blood, urine, or saliva.  Your health care provider may perform these tests if you have symptoms of a hormone disorder . Home pregnancy tests are similar - they test for pregnancy hormones in your urine.

What is type 2 diabetes? If you have diabetes, your blood sugar levels are too high. With type 2 diabetes , this happens because your body does not make enough insulin, or it does not use insulin well (this is called insulin resistance). If you are at risk for type 2 diabetes, you might be able to prevent or delay developing it. Who is at risk for type 2 diabetes? Many Americans are at risk for type 2 diabetes. Your chances of getting it depend on a combination of risk factors such as your genes and lifestyle. The risk factors include: Having prediabetes , which means you have blood sugar levels that are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes Being overweight or having obesity Being age 45 or older A family history of diabetes Being African American, Alaska Native, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander Having high blood pressure Having a low level of HDL (good) cholesterol or a high level of triglycerides A history of diabetes in pregnancy Having given birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more An inactive lifestyle A history of heart disease or stroke Having depression Having polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Having acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition in which your skin becomes dark and thick, especially around your neck or armpits Smoking How can I prevent or delay getting type 2 diabetes? If you are at risk for diabetes, you may be able to prevent or delay getting it. Most of the things that you need to do involve having a healthier lifestyle. So if you make these changes, you will get other health benefits as well. You may lower your risk of other diseases, and you will probably feel better and have more energy. The changes are: Losing weight and keeping it off. Weight control is an important part of diabetes prevention. You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 10% of your current weight. For example, if you weigh 200 pounds, your goal would be to lose between 10 to 20 pounds. And once you lose the weight, it is important that you don't gain it back. Following a healthy eating plan. It is important to reduce the amount of calories you eat and drink each day, so you can lose weight and keep it off. To do that, your diet should include smaller portions and less fat and sugar. You should also eat a variety of foods from each food group, including plenty of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. It's also a good idea to limit red meat, and avoid processed meats. Get regular exercise. Exercise has many health benefits , including helping you to lose weight and lower your blood sugar levels. These both lower your risk of type 2 diabetes. Try to get at least 30 minutes of physical activity 5 days a week. If you have not been active, talk with your health care professional to figure out which types of exercise are best for you. You can start slowly and work up to your goal. Don't smoke. Smoking can contribute to insulin resistance, which can lead to type 2 diabetes. If you already smoke, try to quit . Talk to your health care provider to see whether there is anything else you can do to delay or to prevent type 2 diabetes. If you are at high risk, your provider may suggest that you take one of a few types of diabetes medicines . NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hyperthyroidism? Hyperthyroidism, or overactive thyroid, happens when your thyroid gland makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs. Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. If not treated, hyperthyroidism can cause serious problems with your heart, bones, muscles, menstrual cycle, and fertility. But there are treatments that can help. What causes hyperthyroidism? Hyperthyroidism has several causes. They include: Graves' disease, an autoimmune disorder in which your immune system attacks your thyroid and causes it to make too much hormone. This is the most common cause. Thyroid nodules, which are growths on your thyroid. They are usually benign (not cancer). But they may become overactive and make too much thyroid hormone. Thyroid nodules are more common in older adults. Thyroiditis, inflammation of the thyroid. It causes stored thyroid hormone to leak out of your thyroid gland. Too much iodine. Iodine is found in some medicines, cough syrups, seaweed and seaweed-based supplements. Taking too much of them can cause your thyroid to make too much thyroid hormone. Too much thyroid medicine. This can happen if people who take thyroid hormone medicine for hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) take too much of it. Who is at risk for hyperthyroidism? You are at higher risk for hyperthyroidism if you: Are a woman Are older than age 60 Have been pregnant or had a baby within the past 6 months Have had thyroid surgery or a thyroid problem, such as goiter Have a family history of thyroid disease Have pernicious anemia , in which the body cannot make enough healthy red blood cells because it does not have enough vitamin B12 Have type 1 diabetes or primary adrenal insufficiency, a hormonal disorder Get too much iodine, from eating large amounts of foods containing iodine or using iodine-containing medicines or supplements What are the symptoms of hyperthyroidism? The symptoms of hyperthyroidism can vary from person to person and may include: Nervousness or irritability Fatigue Muscle weakness Trouble tolerating heat Trouble sleeping Tremor , usually in your hands Rapid and irregular heartbeat Frequent bowel movements or diarrhea Weight loss Mood swings Goiter, an enlarged thyroid that may cause your neck to look swollen. Sometimes it can cause trouble with breathing or swallowing. Adults over age 60 may have different symptoms than younger adults. For example, they may lose their appetite or withdraw from other people. Sometimes this can be mistaken for depression or dementia . What other problems can hyperthyroidism cause? If hyperthyroidism isn't treated, it can cause some serious health problems, including: An irregular heartbeat that can lead to blood clots , stroke , heart failure , and other heart problems An eye disease called Graves' ophthalmopathy. It can cause double vision, light sensitivity, and eye pain. In rare cases, it can lead to vision loss . Thinning bones and osteoporosis Fertility problems in women Complications in pregnancy, such as premature birth , low birth weight , high blood pressure in pregnancy , and miscarriage How is hyperthyroidism diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, including asking about symptoms A physical exam Thyroid tests , such as TSH , T3 , T4 , and thyroid antibody  blood tests Imaging tests , such as a thyroid scan, ultrasound , or radioactive iodine uptake test.  A radioactive iodine uptake test measures how much radioactive iodine your thyroid takes up from your blood after you swallow a small amount of it. What are the treatments for hyperthyroidism? The treatments for hyperthyroidism include medicines, radioiodine therapy, and thyroid surgery: Medicines for hyperthyroidism include Antithyroid medicines, which cause your thyroid to make less thyroid hormone. You probably need to take the medicines for 1 to 2 years. In some cases, you might need to take the medicines for several years. This is the simplest treatment, but it is often not a permanent cure. Beta blocker medicines, which can reduce symptoms such as tremors, rapid heartbeat, and nervousness. They work quickly and can help you feel better until other treatments take effect. Radioiodine therapy is a common and effective treatment for hyperthyroidism. It involves taking radioactive iodine by mouth as a capsule or liquid. This slowly destroys the cells of the thyroid gland that produce thyroid hormone. It does not affect other body tissues. Almost everyone who has radioactive iodine treatment later develops hypothyroidism. This is because the thyroid hormone-producing cells have been destroyed. But hypothyroidism is easier to treat and causes fewer long-term health problems than hyperthyroidism. Surgery to remove part or most of the thyroid gland is done in rare cases. It might be an option for people with large goiters or pregnant women who cannot take antithyroid medicines. If you have all of your thyroid removed, you will need to take thyroid medicines for the rest of your life. Some people who have part of their thyroid removed also need to take medicines. If you have hyperthyroidism, it's important not to get too much iodine. Talk to your health care provider about which foods, supplements, and medicines you need to avoid. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hypothyroidism? Hypothyroidism, or underactive thyroid, happens when your thyroid gland doesn't make enough thyroid hormones to meet your body's needs. Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. Without enough thyroid hormones, many of your body's functions slow down. But there are treatments that can help. What causes hypothyroidism? Hypothyroidism has several causes. They include: Hashimoto's disease, an autoimmune disorder where your immune system attacks your thyroid. This is the most common cause. Thyroiditis, inflammation of the thyroid Congenital hypothyroidism, hypothyroidism that is present at birth Surgical removal of part or all of the thyroid Radiation treatment of the thyroid Certain medicines In rare cases, a pituitary disease or too much or too little iodine in your diet Who is at risk for hypothyroidism? You are at higher risk for hypothyroidism if you: Are a woman Are older than age 60 Have had a thyroid problem before, such as a goiter Have had surgery to correct a thyroid problem Have received radiation treatment to the thyroid, neck, or chest Have a family history of thyroid disease Were pregnant or had a baby in the past 6 months Have Turner syndrome , a genetic disorder that affects females Have pernicious anemia , in which the body cannot make enough healthy red blood cells because it does not have enough vitamin B12 Have Sjogren's syndrome , a disease that causes dry eyes and mouth Have type 1 diabetes Have rheumatoid arthritis , an autoimmune disease that affects the joints Have lupus , a chronic autoimmune disease What are the symptoms of hypothyroidism? The symptoms of hypothyroidism can vary from person to person and may include: Fatigue Weight gain A puffy face Trouble tolerating cold Joint and muscle pain Constipation Dry skin Dry, thinning hair Decreased sweating Heavy or irregular menstrual periods Fertility problems in women Depression Slowed heart rate Goiter, an enlarged thyroid that may cause your neck to look swollen. Sometimes it can cause trouble with breathing or swallowing. Because hypothyroidism develops slowly, many people don't notice symptoms of the disease for months or even years. What other problems can hypothyroidism cause? Hypothyroidism can contribute to high cholesterol . In rare cases, untreated hypothyroidism can cause myxedema coma. This is a condition in which your body's functions slow down to the point that it becomes life-threatening. During pregnancy, hypothyroidism can cause complications , such as premature birth , high blood pressure in pregnancy , and miscarriage . It can also slow the baby's growth and development . How is hypothyroidism diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, including asking about your symptoms A physical exam Thyroid tests , such as TSH , T3 , T4 , and thyroid antibody  blood tests Imaging tests , such as a thyroid scan, ultrasound , or radioactive iodine uptake test. A radioactive iodine uptake test measures how much radioactive iodine your thyroid takes up from your blood after you swallow a small amount of it. What are the treatments for hypothyroidism? The treatment for hypothyroidism is medicine to replace the hormone that your own thyroid can no longer make. About 6 to 8 weeks after you start taking the medicine, you will get a blood test to check your thyroid hormone level. Your health care provider will adjust your dose if needed. Each time your dose is adjusted, you'll have another blood test. Once you find the right dose, you will probably get a blood test in 6 months. After that, you will need the test once a year. If you take your medicine according to the instructions, you usually should be able to control the hypothyroidism. You should never stop taking your medicine without talking with your health care provider first. If you have Hashimoto's disease or other types of autoimmune thyroid disorders, you may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Talk to your health care provider about which foods, supplements, and medicines you need to avoid. Women need more iodine when they are pregnant because the baby gets iodine from the mother's diet. If you are pregnant, talk with your health care provider about how much iodine you need. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Islets are cells found in clusters throughout the pancreas . They are made up of several types of cells. One of these is beta cells, which make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the body use glucose for energy. Islet cell transplantation transfers cells from an organ donor into the body of another person. It is an experimental treatment for type 1 diabetes . In type 1 diabetes, the beta cells of the pancreas no longer make insulin. A person who has type 1 diabetes must take insulin daily to live. Transplanted islet cells, however, can take over the work of the destroyed cells. The beta cells in these islets will begin to make and release insulin. Researchers hope islet transplantation will help people with type 1 diabetes live without daily insulin injections. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Menstruation, or period, is normal vaginal bleeding that occurs as part of a woman's monthly cycle. Every month, your body prepares for pregnancy. If no pregnancy occurs, the uterus, or womb, sheds its lining. The menstrual blood is partly blood and partly tissue from inside the uterus. It passes out of the body through the vagina. Periods usually start between age 11 and 14 and continue until menopause at about age 51. They usually last from three to five days. Besides bleeding from the vagina, you may have: Abdominal or pelvic cramping pain Lower back pain Bloating and sore breasts Food cravings Mood swings and irritability Headache and fatigue Premenstrual syndrome , or PMS, is a group of symptoms that start before the period. It can include emotional and physical symptoms. Consult your health care provider if you have big changes in your cycle. They may be signs of other problems that should be treated. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is ovarian cancer? Cancer is a disease in which abnormal cells in the body grow out of control and form a tumor. Ovarian cancer is a cancerous tumor that forms in the tissues of an ovary. The ovaries are a pair of female reproductive glands that make eggs and female hormones . What are the types of ovarian cancer? There are a few different types of ovarian cancer. The most common type is epithelial cancer. It begins in the cells that cover the ovary. There are also two related types of epithelial cancer that can spread to the ovaries: Fallopian tube cancer forms in the tissue lining a fallopian tube. The fallopian tubes are a pair of long, slender tubes on each side of the uterus. The uterus is the female reproductive organ where a baby grows during pregnancy. Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the tissue lining the peritoneum. Your peritoneum is a tissue lining that covers the organs in the abdomen (belly). These two cancers are similar to ovarian cancer, and they have the same treatments. So some medical experts also consider those two types as ovarian cancer. Some other rarer types of ovarian cancer are malignant germ cell tumors and stromal tumors. What causes ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer happens when there are changes (mutations) in the genetic material (DNA). Often, the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Most ovarian cancers are caused by genetic changes that happen during your lifetime. But sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Ovarian cancer that is caused by inherited genetic changes is called hereditary ovarian cancer. There are also certain genetic changes that can raise your risk of ovarian cancer, including changes called BRCA1 and BRCA2 . These two changes also raise your risk of breast and other cancers. Besides genetics, your lifestyle and the environment can affect your risk of ovarian cancer. Who is more likely to develop ovarian cancer? Certain people are more likely to develop ovarian cancer. They include those who: Have a family history of ovarian cancer in a mother, daughter, or sister Have inherited changes in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Have certain other genetic conditions, such as Lynch syndrome Have endometriosis Took hormone replacement therapy Are overweight or have obesity Are tall Are older, especially those who have gone through menopause What are the symptoms of ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer may not cause early signs or symptoms. By the time you do have signs or symptoms, the cancer is often advanced. The signs and symptoms may include: Pain, swelling, or a feeling of pressure in the abdomen or pelvis Sudden or frequent urge to urinate (pee) Trouble eating or feeling full A lump in the pelvic area Gastrointestinal problems, such as gas , bloating, or constipation How is ovarian cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have ovarian cancer, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Will ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had ovarian cancer Will do a physical exam , including a pelvic exam Will likely do imaging tests May do blood tests such as a CA-125 blood test Often the only way to know for sure that you have ovarian cancer is by having a biopsy of the tissue. A biopsy is done during surgery to remove the tumor. What are the treatments for ovarian cancer? Treatments for ovarian cancer may include: Surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible Chemotherapy Targeted therapy , which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Your provider may suggest that you have genetic testing to look for the gene changes that raise the risk for ovarian cancer. Knowing whether or not you have the gene change may help your provider decide on your treatment plan. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. They produce a woman's eggs and make female hormones . Ovarian cysts are fluid-filled sacs in or on an ovary. They usually form during ovulation, when the ovary releases an egg. They are usually harmless and go away by themselves. Most women have them sometime during their lives. Most ovarian cysts are small and don't cause symptoms. Women may not find out that they have them until they have a pelvic exam. If there are symptoms, they may include: Pressure Bloating Swelling Pain in the lower abdomen, on the side where the cyst is If your health care provider finds a cyst, you may be able to wait to see if it gets bigger. You may need surgery if you have pain, are past menopause, or if the cyst does not go away. If a cyst bursts or causes bleeding, you should get medical help right away. Birth control pills can help prevent new cysts. Rarely, ovarian cysts can become cancerous. This risk increases as you get older. A health problem that involves ovarian cysts is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).  Women with PCOS can have high levels of male hormones, irregular or no periods, and small ovarian cysts. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces the juices that help break down food and the hormones that help control blood sugar levels. A pancreas transplant is surgery to place a healthy pancreas from a donor into a person with a diseased pancreas.  It is mostly done for people with severe type 1 diabetes . It can allow them to give up insulin shots.  An experimental procedure called islet cell transplantation transplants only the parts of the pancreas that make insulin. People who have transplants must take drugs to keep their body from rejecting the new pancreas for the rest of their lives. They must also have regular follow-up care. Because of the risks, it is not a common treatment for type 1 diabetes.

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces the juices that help break down food and the hormones that help control blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer usually begins in the cells that produce the juices. Some risk factors for developing pancreatic cancer include: Smoking Long-term diabetes Chronic pancreatitis Certain hereditary disorders Pancreatic cancer is hard to catch early. It doesn't cause symptoms right away. When you do get symptoms, they are often vague or you may not notice them. They include yellowing of the skin and eyes, pain in the abdomen and back, weight loss and fatigue. Also, because the pancreas is hidden behind other organs, health care providers cannot see or feel the tumors during routine exams. Doctors use a physical exam, blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to diagnose it. Because it is often found late and it spreads quickly, pancreatic cancer can be hard to treat.  Possible treatments include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces juices that help break down food and hormones that help control blood sugar levels. Problems with the pancreas can lead to many health problems. These include: Pancreatitis , or inflammation of the pancreas: This happens when digestive enzymes start digesting the pancreas itself Pancreatic cancer Cystic fibrosis , a genetic disorder in which thick, sticky mucus can also block tubes in your pancreas The pancreas also plays a role in diabetes. In type 1 diabetes , the beta cells of the pancreas no longer make insulin because the body's immune system has attacked them. In type 2 diabetes , the pancreas loses the ability to secrete enough insulin in response to meals.

Most people have four pea-sized glands, called parathyroid glands, on the thyroid gland in the neck. Though their names are similar, the thyroid and parathyroid glands are completely different. The parathyroid glands make parathyroid hormone (PTH), which helps your body keep the right balance of calcium and phosphorous. If your parathyroid glands make too much or too little hormone, it disrupts this balance. If they secrete extra PTH, you have hyperparathyroidism, and your blood calcium rises. In many cases, a benign tumor on a parathyroid gland makes it overactive. Or, the extra hormones can come from enlarged parathyroid glands. Very rarely, the cause is cancer. If you do not have enough PTH, you have hypoparathyroidism. Your blood will have too little calcium and too much phosphorous. Causes include injury to the glands, endocrine disorders , or genetic conditions. Treatment is aimed at restoring the balance of calcium and phosphorous. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Pheochromocytoma is a rare tumor that usually starts in the cells of one of your adrenal glands. Although they are usually benign , pheochromocytomas often cause the adrenal gland to make too many hormones. This can lead to high blood pressure and cause  symptoms such as : Headaches Sweating Pounding of the heart Being shaky Being extremely pale Sometimes pheochromocytoma is part of another condition called multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome (MEN). People with MEN often have other cancers and other problems involving hormones. Doctors use lab tests and imaging tests to diagnose it. Surgery is the most common treatment.  Other options include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your pituitary gland is a pea-sized gland at the base of your brain. The pituitary is the "master control gland" - it makes hormones that affect growth and the functions of other glands in the body. With pituitary disorders, you often have too much or too little of one of your hormones.  Injuries can cause pituitary disorders, but the most common cause is a pituitary tumor .

Your pituitary gland is a pea-sized gland at the base of your brain. The pituitary is the "master control gland" - it makes hormones that affect growth and the functions of other glands in the body. Pituitary tumors are common, but often they don't cause health problems. Most people with pituitary tumors never even know they have them. The most common type of pituitary tumor produces hormones and disrupts the balance of hormones in your body. This can cause endocrine diseases such as Cushing's syndrome and hyperthyroidism . Symptoms of pituitary tumors include: Headaches Vision problems Nausea and vomiting Problems caused by the production of too many hormones Pituitary tumors are usually curable. Treatment is often surgery to remove the tumor. Other options include medicines, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.

What is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the name for set of symptoms that are related to an imbalance of hormones . PCOS affects the ovaries, as well as many other parts of the body. People with PCOS usually have at least two of these problems: Not ovulating. Normally, your ovaries make the egg that is released each month as part of a healthy menstrual cycle . This is called ovulation. But with PCOS, the egg may not develop as it should, or it may not be released during ovulation. Your periods may be irregular, or you may not have them at all. High levels of androgens. Androgens are hormones that are important for normal male sexual development. Women normally make smaller amounts of androgens. Having higher levels of androgens can cause you to have extra body or facial hair (called hirsutism). Cysts in one or both ovaries. Cysts are growths that are small, fluid-filled sacs. What causes polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? The exact cause of PCOS in unknown. Research has shown that different factors may play a role, including: Genetics . PCOS tends to run in families. Imbalances in androgen levels. Insulin resistance. This is a condition in which your body can't use insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone that helps move blood glucose (sugar) into your cells to give them energy. Insulin resistance can lead to high blood glucose levels. What are the symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? PCOS often develops as young as age 11 or 12, around the time of your first period. But you can develop it later. The symptoms can vary from person to person. Some people have few or even no symptoms. They may not realize they have PCOS until they have trouble getting pregnant. Other people may have more severe symptoms. The symptoms of PCOS may include: Irregular or missed menstrual periods. Too much hair on the face, chest, stomach, or thighs. Obesity , weight gain, or trouble losing weight. Severe acne which may be hard to treat. Oily skin. Patches of thickened dark skin (called acanthosis nigricans). Infertility . PCOS is one of the most common causes of infertility. But many people with PCOS can still get pregnant. What other health problems are linked to polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? PCOS is linked to many other health problems, including: Insulin resistance, which can lead to prediabetes and type 2 diabetes . Heart disease . Having PCOS increases your risk, and this risk goes up as you age. High blood pressure . High LDL ("bad") cholesterol and low HDL ("good") cholesterol . This increases your risk of heart disease . Sleep apnea , a disorder that causes you to repeatedly stop breathing during sleep. Depression and anxiety . Although there are links between PCOS and these conditions, researchers do not know whether: PCOS causes some of these problems Some of these problems cause PCOS, or There are other conditions that cause both PCOS and these other health problems Not everyone who has PCOS will have all these problems. However, you and your health care provider may want to monitor your health for signs of them, so they can be treated early. How is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) diagnosed? There is no specific test for PCOS. To find out if you have PCOS, your provider: Will do a physical exam, which will include looking for the physical signs of PCOS. Will ask about your medical history and family health history. May do a pelvic exam to check for signs of extra male hormones and to see if your ovaries are enlarged or swollen. May order a pelvic ultrasound to look for cysts on your ovaries and check the thickness of your endometrium (the lining of your uterus, or womb). May order blood tests, including tests to check your hormone levels. What are the treatments for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? There is no cure for PCOS, but treatments can help you manage your symptoms. The treatments may include: Lifestyle changes, which can help reduce many symptoms. They can also lower your risk for or help manage related health problems. These changes include: Maintaining a healthy weight Getting regular physical activity Eating healthy foods Medicines: Hormonal birth control , such as pills, shots, and IUDs, can make your period more regular. They may also help remove acne and extra facial and body hair. But you would only use them if you don't want to get pregnant. Anti-androgen medicines, which block the effect of androgens. This can help reduce hair loss on your head, the growth of facial and body hair, and acne. Providers do use them to help with these symptoms, but anti-androgen medicines are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat PCOS. These medicines can cause problems during pregnancy. Your provider may have you take them with birth control (to prevent pregnancy). Insulin-sensitizing medicines, which are medicines that are used to treat type 2 diabetes. They improve insulin resistance and keep your blood glucose levels steady. They may also lower your androgen levels. They are not approved by the FDA to treat PCOS. But they may help with your symptoms. Medicines for acne. These medicines come in pills, creams, or gels. Treatments for hair removal, such as facial hair removal creams, laser hair removal, and electrolysis. Fertility treatments if you are having trouble getting pregnant. They include medicines and procedures such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) .

What is prediabetes? Prediabetes means that your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes . Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Too much glucose in your blood can damage your body over time. If you have prediabetes, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke . But if you make some lifestyle changes now, you may be able to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes. What causes prediabetes? Prediabetes usually happens when your body has a problem with insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. A problem with insulin could be: Insulin resistance, a condition in which the body can't use its insulin properly. It makes it hard for your cells to get glucose from your blood. This can cause your blood sugar levels to rise. Your body can't make enough insulin to keep your blood sugar levels at a healthy level Researchers think that being overweight and not getting regular physical activity are major factors in causing prediabetes. Who is at risk for prediabetes? About 1 out of every 3 adults has prediabetes. It is more common in people who: Are overweight or have obesity Are age 45 or older Have a parent, brother, or sister with diabetes Are African American, Alaska Native, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander American Are not physically active Have health conditions such as high blood pressure and high cholesterol Have had gestational diabetes (diabetes in pregnancy) Have a history of heart disease or stroke Have metabolic syndrome Have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) What are the symptoms of prediabetes? Most people don't know they have prediabetes because usually there are no symptoms. Some people with prediabetes may have darkened skin in the armpit or on the back and sides of the neck. They may also have many small skin growths in those same areas. How is prediabetes diagnosed? There are a few different blood tests that can diagnose prediabetes. The most common ones are: Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, which measures your blood sugar at a single point in time. You need to fast (not eat or drink) for at least 8 hours before the test. The results of the test are given in mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter): A normal level is 99 or below Prediabetes is 100 to 125 Type 2 diabetes is 126 and above A1C test , which measures your average blood sugar over the past 3 months. The results of an A1C test are given as a percentage. The higher the percentage, the higher your blood sugar levels have been. A normal level is below 5.7% Prediabetes is between 5.7 to 6.4% Type 2 diabetes is above 6.5% If I have prediabetes, will I get diabetes? If you have prediabetes, you may be able to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes through lifestyle changes: Losing weight , if you are overweight Getting regular physical activity Following a healthy, reduced-calorie eating plan In some cases, your health care provider may also recommend taking diabetes medicines . Can prediabetes be prevented? If you are at risk for prediabetes, those same lifestyle changes (losing weight, regular physical activity, and a healthy eating plan) may prevent you from getting it. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI), also known as premature ovarian failure, happens when a woman's ovaries stop working normally before she is 40. Many women naturally experience reduced fertility when they are about 40 years old. They may start getting irregular menstrual periods as they transition to menopause. For women with POI, irregular periods and reduced fertility start before the age of 40. Sometimes it can start as early as the teenage years. POI is different from premature menopause . With premature menopause, your periods stop before age 40. You can no longer get pregnant. The cause can be natural or it can be a disease, surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. With POI, some women still have occasional periods. They may even get pregnant.  In most cases of POI, the cause is unknown. What causes primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? In about 90% of cases, the exact cause of POI is unknown. Research shows that POI is related to problems with the follicles. Follicles are small sacs in your ovaries. Your eggs grow and mature inside them. One type of follicle problem is that you run out of working follicles earlier than normal. Another is that the follicles are not working properly. In most cases, the cause of the follicle problem is unknown. But sometimes the cause may be: Genetic disorders such as Fragile X syndrome and Turner syndrome A low number of follicles Autoimmune diseases, including thyroiditis and Addison disease Chemotherapy or radiation therapy Metabolic disorders Toxins, such as cigarette smoke , chemicals, and pesticides Who is at risk for primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Certain factors can raise a woman's risk of POI: Family history. Women who have a mother or sister with POI are more likely to have it. Genes. Some changes to genes and genetic conditions put women at higher risk for POI. For example, women Fragile X syndrome or Turner syndrome are at higher risk. Certain diseases, such as autoimmune diseases and viral infections Cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy Age. Younger women can get POI, but it becomes more common between the ages of 35-40. What are the symptoms of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? The first sign of POI is usually irregular or missed periods. Later symptoms may be similar to those of natural menopause: Hot flashes Night sweats Irritability Poor concentration Decreased sex drive Pain during sex Vaginal dryness For many women with POI, trouble getting pregnant or infertility is the reason they go to their health care provider. What other problems can primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) cause? Since POI causes you to have lower levels of certain hormones, you are at greater risk for other health conditions, including: Anxiety and depression. Hormonal changes caused by POI can contribute to anxiety or lead to depression . Dry eye syndrome and eye surface disease. Some women with POI have one of these eye conditions. Both can cause discomfort and may lead to blurred vision. If not treated, these conditions can cause permanent eye damage. Heart disease. Lower levels of estrogen can affect the muscles lining the arteries and can increase the buildup of cholesterol in the arteries. These factors increase your risk of atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries). Infertility. Low thyroid function. This problem also is called hypothyroidism . The thyroid is a gland that makes hormones that control your body's metabolism and energy level. Low levels thyroid hormones can affect your metabolism and can cause very low energy, mental sluggishness, and other symptoms. Osteoporosis. The hormone estrogen helps keep bones strong. Without enough estrogen, women with POI often develop osteoporosis . It is a bone disease that causes weak, brittle bones that are more likely to break . How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) diagnosed? To diagnose POI, your health care provider may do: A medical history, including asking whether you have relatives with POI A pregnancy test, to make sure that you are not pregnant A physical exam, to look for signs of other disorders which could be causing your symptoms Blood tests, to check for certain hormone levels. You may also have a blood test to do a chromosome analysis. A chromosome is the part of a cell that contains genetic information. A pelvic ultrasound, to see whether or not the ovaries are enlarged or have multiple follicles How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) treated? Currently, there is no proven treatment to restore normal function to a woman's ovaries.  But there are treatments for some of the symptoms of POI. There are also ways to lower your health risks and treat the conditions that POI can cause: Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). HRT is the most common treatment. It gives your body the estrogen and other hormones that your ovaries are not making. HRT improves sexual health and decreases the risks for heart disease and osteoporosis. You usually take it until about age 50; that's about the age when menopause usually begins. Calcium and vitamin D supplements. Because women with POI are at higher risk for osteoporosis, you should take calcium and vitamin D every day. In vitro fertilization (IVF). If you have POI and you wish to become pregnant, you may consider trying IVF . Regular physical activity and a healthy body weight. Getting regular exercise and controlling your weight can lower your risk for osteoporosis and heart disease. Treatments for associated conditions. If you have a condition that is related to POI, it is important to treat that as well. Treatments may involve medicines and hormones. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is a cancer that develops in the tissues of one or both testicles. The testicles, or testes, are part of the male reproductive system. They make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped glands inside the scrotum, a sac of loose skin that lies below the penis. You can get cancer in one or both testicles. Who is most likely to develop testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is very rare. You can get it at any age, but it is most common in men between the ages of 20 and 39.  It is also more common in those who: Have had abnormal testicle development Have had an undescended testicle, a condition in which one or both testicles fail to move into the scrotum before birth Have had testicle cancer before Have a family history of the cancer Are White What are the symptoms of testicular cancer? The symptoms of testicular cancer may include: A painless lump or swelling in either testicle A change in how the testicle feels A dull ache in the lower abdomen (belly) or the groin (the area where the thigh meets the abdomen) A sudden build-up of fluid in the scrotum Pain or discomfort in a testicle or in the scrotum How is testicular cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have testicular cancer, your health care provider may use: A physical exam. Blood tests. An ultrasound of the testicles. An inguinal orchiectomy, which is a procedure to remove the entire testicle. A tissue sample from the testicle is viewed under a microscope to check for cancer cells. What are the treatments for testicular cancer? Testicular cancer can usually be cured.The treatment options include: Surgery (if the testicle has not already been removed during diagnosis). Radiation therapy . Chemotherapy . High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant . Surveillance, which might be done after surgery. It means that your provider will closely follow your condition with regular exams and tests. You won't get any further treatment unless there are changes in your test results. Some of the treatments may also cause infertility . If you may want to have children later on, you should consider sperm banking before treatment. After you have finished your treatment, you will need regular follow-up testing to make sure that the cancer has not come back. If you have had cancer in one testicle, you have a higher risk of getting cancer in the other testicle. So it's important to check the other testicle regularly and let your provider know if you notice any changes or unusual symptoms. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Testicles, or testes, make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped organs inside the scrotum, the loose sac of skin behind the penis. It's easy to injure your testicles because they are not protected by bones or muscles. Men and boys should wear athletic supporters when they play sports. You should examine your testicles monthly and seek medical attention for lumps, redness, pain or other changes. Testicles can get inflamed or infected. They can also develop cancer. Testicular cancer is rare and highly treatable. It usually happens between the ages of 15 and 40.

What is thyroid cancer? Thyroid cancer is a cancer that starts in the tissues of the thyroid. Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. What are the different types of thyroid cancer? There are different types of thyroid cancer; the main ones include: Differentiated thyroid cancer, which includes papillary cancer and follicular cancer Medullary thyroid cancer Anaplastic thyroid cancer Who is more likely to develop thyroid cancer? Certain people are more likely to develop thyroid cancer. Your risk is higher if you: Are between ages 25 and 65 Are a woman Are Asian Were exposed to certain types of radiation, including from radiation treatments to your head or neck as a child or from a radiation emergency Have had a goiter (enlarged thyroid) Having certain genetic conditions , including certain types of multiple endocrine neoplasia Have a family history of thyroid cancer or thyroid disease What are the symptoms of thyroid cancer? Thyroid cancer may not cause symptoms at first. It is sometimes found during a routine physical exam. You may get signs or symptoms as the cancer gets bigger. The symptoms may include: A lump (nodule) in the neck Trouble breathing Trouble swallowing Pain when swallowing Hoarseness or other changes to your voice that do not get better How is thyroid cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have thyroid cancer, your health care provider may use: A physical exam, including checking your neck for swelling, lumps, or anything that seems unusual A medical history Thyroid tests Other blood or imaging tests A biopsy What are the treatments for thyroid cancer? Treatment for thyroid cancer depends on the type of cancer you have and whether the cancer has spread. Often, more than one type of treatment may be needed. The treatment options include: Surgery. Radiation therapy, including radioactive iodine therapy. Chemotherapy . Thyroid hormone therapy. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Watchful waiting, which means that you don't get treatment right away. Your regularly checks to see if your signs or symptoms appear or change. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. Thyroid diseases cause your thyroid to make either too much or too little of the hormones. Some of the different thyroid diseases include: Goiter, an enlargement of the thyroid gland Hyperthyroidism , which happens when your thyroid gland makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs Hypothyroidism , which happens when your thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormones Thyroid cancer Thyroid nodules, lumps in the thyroid gland Thyroiditis, swelling of the thyroid To diagnose thyroid diseases, your health care provider may use a medical history, physical exam, and thyroid tests . In some cases, your provider may also do a biopsy . Treatment depends on the problem, how severe it is, and what your symptoms are. Possible treatments may include medicines, radioiodine therapy, or thyroid surgery. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. Thyroid tests check how well your thyroid is working. They are also used to diagnose and help find the cause of thyroid diseases such as hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism . Thyroid tests include blood tests and imaging tests. Blood tests for your thyroid include: TSH . It measures thyroid-stimulating hormone. This is usually the first test your healthcare provider will order. T3 and T4 . They measure the level of the different thyroid hormones in your blood. Thyroid antibodies test . It measures certain thyroid antibodies (markers in the blood). This test may help diagnose autoimmune thyroid disorders. Imaging tests include: CT scans Ultrasound Nuclear medicine tests , including: Thyroid scan. It uses small amounts of radioactive material to create a picture of the thyroid, showing its size, shape, and position. It can help find the cause of hyperthyroidism and check for thyroid nodules (lumps in the thyroid). Radioactive iodine uptake test, or thyroid uptake test. It checks how well your thyroid is working and can help find the cause of hyperthyroidism. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Amblyopia, or "lazy eye," is the most common cause of visual impairment in children.  It happens when an eye fails to work properly with the brain.  The eye may look normal, but the brain favors the other eye.   In some cases, it can affect both eyes.  Causes include: Strabismus - a disorder in which the two eyes don't line up in the same direction Refractive error in an eye - when one eye cannot focus as well as the other, because of a problem with its shape.  This includes nearsightedness, farsightedness, and astigmatism. Cataract - a clouding in the lens of the eye It can be hard to diagnose amblyopia.  It is often found during a routine vision exam. Treatment for amblyopia forces the child to use the eye with weaker vision.  There are two common ways to do this.  One is to have the child wear a patch over the good eye for several hours each day, over a number of weeks to months.  The other is with eye drops that temporarily blur vision.  Each day, the child gets a drop of a drug called atropine in the stronger eye.  It is also sometimes necessary to treat the underlying cause.  This could include glasses or surgery. NIH: National Eye Institute

A cataract is a clouding of the lens in your eye.  It affects your vision.  Cataracts are very common in older people. By age 80, more than half of all Americans either have a cataract or have had cataract surgery. A cataract can occur in either or both eyes. It cannot spread from one eye to the other. Common symptoms are: Blurry vision Colors that seem faded Glare - headlights, lamps or sunlight may seem too bright. You may also see a halo around lights. Not being able to see well at night Double vision Frequent prescription changes in your eye wear Cataracts usually develop slowly. New glasses, brighter lighting, anti-glare sunglasses or magnifying lenses can help at first. Surgery is also an option. It involves removing the cloudy lens and replacing it with an artificial lens. Wearing sunglasses and a hat with a brim to block ultraviolet sunlight may help to delay cataracts. NIH: National Eye Institute

Most of us see our world in color. We enjoy looking at a lush green lawn or a red rose in full bloom. If you have a color vision defect, you may see these colors differently than most people. There are three main kinds of color vision defects. Red-green color vision defects are the most common. This type occurs in men more than in women. The other major types are blue-yellow color vision defects and a complete absence of color vision. Most of the time, color blindness is genetic. There is no treatment, but most people adjust and the condition doesn't limit their activities.

Your cornea is the outermost layer of your eye. It is clear and shaped like a dome. The cornea helps to shield the rest of the eye from germs, dust, and other harmful matter. It also helps your eye to focus. If you wear contact lenses, they float on top of your corneas. Problems with the cornea include: Refractive errors Allergies Infections Injuries Dystrophies - conditions in which parts of the cornea lose clarity due to a buildup of cloudy material Treatments of corneal disorders include medicines, corneal transplantation, and corneal laser surgery. NIH: National Eye Institute

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. What eye problems can diabetes cause? Over time, high blood sugar may damage the blood vessels and lenses in your eyes. This can lead to serious diabetic eye problems which can harm your vision and sometimes cause blindness . Some common diabetes eye problems include: Diabetic retinopathy , which is the leading cause of blindness in American adults. It affects blood vessels in the retina (the light-sensitive layer of tissue in the back of your eye). The blood vessels may swell and leak fluid into your eye. If it's not treated, it can cause serious problems such as vision loss and retinal detachment , where the retina is pulled away from its normal position at the back of your eye. Diabetic macular edema (DME) , which happens when blood vessels in the retina leak fluid into the macula (a part of the retina needed for sharp, central vision). This usually develops in people who already have other signs of diabetic retinopathy. Glaucoma , a group of eye diseases that can damage the optic nerve (the bundle of nerves that connects the eye to the brain). Glaucoma from diabetes happens when the blood vessels in the front of your eye are damaged, and new blood vessels grow near the iris (the colored part of your eye). The blood vessels block the space where fluid drains from your eye. This causes fluid to build up and pressure to increase inside your eye. Cataract , which happen when the clear lens in the front of your eye becomes cloudy. Cataracts are common as people age. But people with diabetes are more likely to develop cataracts younger and faster than people without diabetes. Researchers think that high glucose levels cause deposits to build up in the lenses of your eyes. Who is more likely to develop diabetic eye problems? Anyone with diabetes can develop diabetic eye disease. But your risk of developing it is higher if you: Have had diabetes for a long time Don't have good control over your high blood sugar or high blood pressure Are pregnant Have high blood cholesterol Smoke tobacco What are the symptoms of diabetic eye problems? In the early stages, diabetic eye problems usually don't have any symptoms. That's why regular dilated eye exams are so important, even if you think your eyes are healthy. You should also watch for sudden changes in your vision that could mean an emergency. Call your doctor right away if you notice any of these symptoms: Many new spots or dark wavy strings floating in your vision (floaters) Flashes of light A dark shadow over part of your vision, like a curtain Vision loss Eye pain or redness Talk with your doctor if you have these symptoms, even if they come and go: Spots or dark wavy strings floating in your vision Blurry or wavy vision Vision that changes a lot Trouble seeing colors How are diabetic eye problems diagnosed? Eye doctors do dilated eye exams to diagnose eye problems. A dilated eye exam uses eye drops to open your pupils wide so your doctor can look for signs of eye problems and treat them before they harm your vision. Your doctor will also test your vision and measure the pressure in your eyes. What are the treatments for diabetic eye problems? Treatment for diabetic eye problems depends on the problem and how serious it is. Some of the treatments include: Lasers to stop blood vessels from leaking Injections (shots) in the eye to stop new, leaky blood vessels from growing Surgery to remove blood and scar tissue or replace a cloudy lens Eye drops to lower fluid pressure in the eye But these treatments aren't cures. Eye problems can come back. That's why your best defense against serious vision loss is to take control of your diabetes and get regular eye exams. It's also important to keep your blood pressure and cholesterol in a healthy range. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Cancer of the eye is uncommon. It can affect the outer parts of the eye, such as the eyelid, which are made up of muscles, skin and nerves. If the cancer starts inside the eyeball it's called intraocular cancer. The most common intraocular cancers in adults are melanoma and lymphoma. The most common eye cancer in children is retinoblastoma, which starts in the cells of the retina.  Cancer can also spread to the eye from other parts of the body. Treatment for eye cancer varies by the type and by how advanced it is. It may include surgery, radiation therapy, freezing or heat therapy, or laser therapy.

Your eyes are an important part of your health. Most people rely on their eyes to see and make sense of the world around them. But some eye diseases can lead to vision loss , so it is important to identify and treat eye diseases as early as possible. You should get your eyes checked as often as your health care provider recommends it, or if you have any new vision problems. And just as it is important to keep your body healthy, you also need to keep your eyes healthy. Eye Care Tips There are things you can do to help keep your eyes healthy and make sure you are seeing your best: Eat a healthy, balanced diet. Your diet should include plenty or fruits and vegetables, especially deep yellow and green leafy vegetables. Eating fish high in omega-3 fatty acids, such as salmon, tuna, and halibut can also help your eyes. Maintain a healthy weight. Being overweight or having obesity increases your risk of developing diabetes. Having diabetes puts you at higher risk of getting diabetic retinopathy or glaucoma . Get regular exercise. Exercise may help to prevent or control diabetes, high blood pressure, and high cholesterol. These diseases can lead to some eye or vision problems. So if you exercise regularly, you can lower your risk of getting these eye and vision problems. Wear sunglasses. Sun exposure can damage your eyes and raise your risk of cataracts and age-related macular degeneration . Protect your eyes by using sunglasses that block out 99 to 100% of both UV-A and UV-B radiation. Wear protective eye wear. To prevent eye injuries , you need eye protection when playing certain sports, working in jobs such as factory work and construction, and doing repairs or projects in your home. Avoid smoking. Smoking increases the risk of developing age-related eye diseases such as macular degeneration and cataracts and can damage the optic nerve . Know your family medical history. Some eye diseases are inherited, so it is important to find out whether anyone in your family has had them. This can help you determine if you are at higher risk of developing an eye disease. Know your other risk factors. As you get older, you are at higher risk of developing age-related eye diseases and conditions. It is important to know you risk factors because you may be able to lower your risk by changing some behaviors. If you wear contacts, take steps to prevent eye infections. Wash your hands well before you put in or take out your contact lenses. Also follow the instructions on how to properly clean them, and replace them when needed. Give your eyes a rest. If you spend a lot of time using a computer, you can forget to blink your eyes and your eyes can get tired. To reduce eyestrain, try the 20-20-20 rule: Every 20 minutes, look away about 20 feet in front of you for 20 seconds. Eye Tests and Exams Everyone needs to have their eyesight tested to check for vision and eye problems. Children usually have vision screening in school or at their health care provider's office during a checkup. Adults may also get vision screenings during their checkups. But many adults need more than a vision screening. They need a comprehensive dilated eye exam. Getting comprehensive dilated eye exams is especially important because some eye diseases may not have warning signs. The exams are the only way to detect these diseases in their early stages, when they are easier to treat. The exam includes several tests: A visual field test to measure your side (peripheral) vision. A loss of peripheral vision may be a sign of glaucoma. A visual acuity test, where you read an eye chart about 20 feet away, to check on how well you see at various distances Tonometry, which measures your eye's interior pressure. It helps to detect glaucoma. Dilation, which involves getting eye drops that dilate (widen) your pupils. This allows more light to enter the eye. Your eye care provider examines your eyes using a special magnifying lens. This provides a clear view of important tissues at the back of your eye, including the retina , macula, and optic nerve. If you have a refractive error and are going to need glasses or contacts , then you will also have a refraction test. When you have this test, you look through a device that has lenses of different strengths to help your eye care professional figure out which lenses will give you the clearest vision. At what age you should start getting these exams and how often you need them depends on many factors. They include your age, race, and overall health.  For example, if you are African American, you are at higher risk of glaucoma and you need to start getting the exams earlier. If you have diabetes, you should get an exam every year. Check with your health care provider about if and when you need these exams.

Some eye problems are minor and don't last long. But some can lead to a permanent loss of vision . Common eye problems include: Refractive errors Cataracts - clouded lenses Optic nerve disorders , including glaucoma Retinal disorders - problems with the nerve layer at the back of the eye Macular degeneration - a disease that destroys sharp, central vision Diabetic eye problems Conjunctivitis - an  infection also known as pink eye Your best defense is to have regular checkups , because eye diseases do not always have symptoms. Early detection and treatment could prevent vision loss. See an eye care professional right away if you have a sudden change in vision, if everything looks dim, or if you see flashes of light. Other symptoms that need quick attention are pain, double vision, fluid coming from the eye, and inflammation. NIH: National Eye Institute

Your eyes can get infections from bacteria, fungi, or viruses. Eye infections can occur in different parts of the eye and can affect just one eye or both. Two common eye infections are: Conjunctivitis - also known as pink eye . Conjunctivitis is often due to an infection. Children frequently get it, and it is very contagious. Stye - a bump on the eyelid that happens when bacteria from your skin get into the hair follicle of an eyelash. Symptoms of eye infections may include redness, itching, swelling, discharge, pain, or problems with vision. Treatment depends on the cause of the infection and may include compresses, eye drops, creams, or antibiotics.

The structure of your face helps protect your eyes from injury. Still, injuries can damage your eye, sometimes severely enough that you could lose your vision. Most eye injuries are preventable. If you play sports or work in certain jobs, you may need protection. The most common type of injury happens when something irritates the outer surface of your eye. Certain jobs such as industrial jobs or hobbies such as carpentry make this type of injury more likely. It's also more likely if you wear contact lenses. Chemicals or heat can burn your eyes. With chemicals, the pain may cause you to close your eyes.  This traps the irritant next to the eye and may cause more damage. You should wash out your eye right away while you wait for medical help.

Your eyelids help protect your eyes. When you blink, your eyelids spread moisture over your eyes. Blinking also helps move dirt or other particles off the surface of the eye.  You close your eyelids when you see something coming toward your eyes.  This can help protect against injuries. Like most other parts of your body, your eyelids can get infected, inflamed, or even develop cancer. There are also specific eyelid problems, including: Eyelids that turn in or out Eyelids that droop Abnormal blinking or twitching Treatment of eyelid problems depends on the cause.

When you look at an object, you're using several muscles to move both eyes to focus on it. If you have a problem with the muscles, the eyes don't work properly. There are many kinds of eye movement disorders. Two common ones are: Strabismus - a disorder in which the two eyes don't line up in the same direction. This results in "crossed eyes" or "walleye." Nystagmus - fast, uncontrollable movements of the eyes, sometimes called "dancing eyes" Some eye movement disorders are present at birth. Others develop over time and may be associated with other problems, such as injuries. Treatments include glasses, patches, eye muscle exercises, and surgery. There is no cure for some kinds of eye movement disorders, such as most kinds of nystagmus.

Eye wear protects or corrects your vision. Examples are: Sunglasses Safety goggles Glasses (also called eyeglasses) Contact lenses If you need corrective lenses, you may be able to choose between contacts or glasses.   Either usually requires a prescription. Almost anyone can wear glasses.  Contact lenses require more careful handling. Many jobs and some sports carry a risk of eye injury . Thousands of children and adults get eye injuries every year. Most are preventable with proper eye protection. Everyone is at risk for eye damage from the sun year-round. It's important to regularly use sunglasses that block out at least 99% of UV rays.

Glaucoma is a group of diseases that can damage the eye's optic nerve . It is a leading cause of blindness in the United States. It usually happens when the fluid pressure inside the eyes slowly rises, damaging the optic nerve. Often there are no symptoms at first. Without treatment, people with glaucoma will slowly lose their peripheral, or side vision. They seem to be looking through a tunnel. Over time, straight-ahead vision may decrease until no vision remains. A comprehensive eye exam can tell if you have glaucoma.  People at risk should get eye exams at least every two years.  They include: African Americans over age 40 People over age 60, especially Mexican Americans People with a family history of glaucoma There is no cure, but glaucoma can usually be controlled. Early treatment can help protect your eyes against vision loss. Treatments usually include prescription eyedrops and/or surgery. NIH: National Eye Institute

For many people, laser eye surgery can correct their vision so they no longer need 
glasses or contact lenses.  Laser eye surgery reshapes the cornea, the clear front part of 
the eye.  This changes its focusing power. There are different types of laser eye surgery.  LASIK - laser-assisted in situ 
keratomileusis - is one of the most common. Many patients who have LASIK end up with 20/20 
vision. But, like all medical procedures, it has both risks and benefits.  Only your eye 
doctor can tell if you are a good candidate for laser eye surgery.

Macular degeneration, or age-related macular degeneration (AMD), is a leading cause of vision loss in Americans 60 and older. It is a disease that destroys your sharp, central vision. You need central vision to see objects clearly and to do tasks such as reading and driving. AMD affects the macula, the part of the eye that allows you to see fine detail. It does not hurt, but it causes cells in the macula to die. There are two types: wet and dry. Wet AMD happens when abnormal blood vessels grow under the macula. These new blood vessels often leak blood and fluid. Wet AMD damages the macula quickly. Blurred vision is a common early symptom. Dry AMD happens when the light-sensitive cells in the macula slowly break down. Your gradually lose your central vision. A common early symptom is that straight lines appear crooked. Regular comprehensive eye exams can detect macular degeneration before the disease causes vision loss. Treatment can slow vision loss. It does not restore vision. NIH: National Eye Institute

The optic nerve is a bundle of more than 1 million nerve fibers that carry visual messages. You have one connecting the back of each eye (your retina ) to your brain. Damage to an optic nerve can cause vision loss . The type of vision loss and how severe it is depends on where the damage occurs. It may affect one or both eyes. There are many different types of optic nerve disorders, including: Glaucoma is a group of diseases that are the leading cause of blindness in the United States. Glaucoma usually happens when the fluid pressure inside the eyes slowly rises and damages the optic nerve. Optic neuritis is an inflammation of the optic nerve. Causes include infections and immune-related illnesses such as multiple sclerosis . Sometimes the cause is unknown. Optic nerve atrophy is damage to the optic nerve. Causes include poor blood flow to the eye, disease, trauma, or exposure to toxic substances. Optic nerve head drusen are pockets of protein and calcium salts that build up in the optic nerve over time Contact your health care provider if you are having vision problems. Tests for optic nerve disorders may include eye exams, ophthalmoscopy (an examination of the back of your eye), and imaging tests . Treatment depends on which disorder that you have. With some optic nerve disorders, you may get your vision back. With others, there is no treatment, or treatment may only prevent further vision loss.

Conjunctivitis is the medical name for pink eye. It involves inflammation of the outer layer of the eye and inside of the eyelid. It can cause swelling, itching, burning, discharge, and redness. Causes include: Bacterial or viral infection Allergies Substances that cause irritation Contact lens products, eye drops, or eye ointments Pink eye usually does not affect vision. Infectious pink eye can easily spread from one person to another. The infection will clear in most cases without medical care, but bacterial pink eye needs treatment with antibiotic eye drops or ointment. NIH: National Eye Institute

The cornea and lens of your eye helps you focus.  Refractive errors are vision problems that happen when the shape of the eye keeps you from focusing well. The cause could be the length of the eyeball (longer or shorter), changes in the shape of the cornea, or aging of the lens. Four common refractive errors are: Myopia, or nearsightedness - clear vision close up but  blurry in the distance Hyperopia, or farsightedness - clear vision in the distance but blurry 
close up Presbyopia - inability to focus close up as a result of aging Astigmatism - focus problems caused by the cornea The most common symptom is blurred vision. Other symptoms may include double vision, haziness, glare or halos around bright lights, squinting, headaches, or eye strain. Glasses or contact lenses can usually correct refractive errors. Laser eye surgery may also be a possibility. NIH: National Eye Institute

The retina is a layer of tissue in the back of your eye that senses light and sends images to your brain. It provides the sharp, central vision needed for reading, driving, and seeing fine detail. A retinal detachment lifts or pulls the retina from its normal position.  It can occur at any age, but it is more common in people over age 40. It affects men more than women and whites more than African Americans. A retinal detachment is also more likely to occur in people who: Are extremely nearsighted Have had a retinal detachment in the other eye Have a family history of retinal detachment Have had cataract surgery Have other eye diseases or disorders Have had an eye injury Symptoms include an increase in the number of floaters, which are little "cobwebs" or specks that float about in your field of vision, and/or light flashes in the eye. It may also seem like there is a "curtain" over your field of vision. A retinal detachment is a medical emergency.  If not promptly treated, it can cause permanent vision loss. If you have any symptoms, see an eye care professional immediately. Treatment includes different types of surgery. NIH: National Eye Institute

The retina is a layer of tissue in the back of your eye that senses light and sends images to your brain. In the center of this nerve tissue is the macula. It provides the sharp, central vision needed for reading, driving and seeing fine detail. Retinal disorders affect this vital tissue. They can affect your vision, and some can be serious enough to cause blindness . Examples are: Macular degeneration - a disease that destroys your sharp, central vision Diabetic eye disease Retinal detachment - a medical emergency, when the retina is pulled away from the back of the eye Retinoblastoma - cancer of the retina.  It is most common in young children. Macular pucker - scar tissue on the macula Macular hole -  a small break in the macula that usually happens to people over 60 Floaters - cobwebs or specks in your field of vision NIH: National Eye Institute

You may only think of tears as those salty drops that fall from your eyes when you cry. Actually, your tears clean your eyes every time you blink. Tears also keep your eyes moist, which is important for your vision. Tear glands produce tears, and tear ducts carry the tears from the glands to the surface of your eye.  Problems with the tear system can include too many tears, too few tears, or problems with the tear ducts. Treatment of the problem depends on the cause.

If you have low vision, eyeglasses, contact lenses, medicine, or surgery may not help. Activities like reading, shopping, cooking, writing, and watching TV may be hard to do.   The leading causes of low vision and blindness in the United States are age-related eye diseases: macular degeneration , cataract and glaucoma .  Other eye disorders , eye injuries , and birth defects can also cause vision loss. Whatever the cause, lost vision cannot be restored. It can, however, be managed. A loss of vision means that you may have to reorganize your life and learn new ways of doing things. If you have some vision, visual aids such as special glasses and large print books can make life easier. There are also devices to help those with no vision, like text-reading software and braille books. The sooner vision loss or eye disease is found and treated, the greater your chances of keeping your remaining vision. You should have regular comprehensive eye exams by an eye care professional. NIH: National Eye Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? Acute lymphocytic leukemia is a type of acute leukemia. It's also called ALL and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. "Acute" means that it usually gets worse quickly if it's not treated. ALL is the most common type of cancer in children . It can also affect adults. In ALL, the bone marrow makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. These cells normally help your body fight infection. But in ALL, they are abnormal and cannot fight infection very well. They also crowd out the healthy cells, which can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding. These abnormal cells can also spread to other parts of the body, including the brain and spinal cord. What causes acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? ALL happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise your risk of ALL. Who is at risk for acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? The factors that raise your risk of ALL include: Being male Being white Being over age 70 Having had chemotherapy or radiation therapy Having been exposed to high levels of radiation Having certain genetic disorders , such as Down syndrome What are the symptoms of acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? The signs and symptoms of ALL include: Weakness or feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Shortness of breath Weight loss or loss of appetite Pain in the bones or stomach Pain or feeling of fullness below the ribs Swollen lymph nodes - you may notice them as painless lumps in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin Having had many infections How is acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose ALL and figure out which subtype you have: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as Complete blood count (CBC) with differential Blood chemistry tests such as a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and electrolyte panel Blood smear Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with ALL, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture , which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? Treatments for ALL include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Treatment is usually done in two phases: The goal of the first phase is to kill the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow. This treatment puts the leukemia into remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The second phase is known as post-remission therapy. Its goal is to prevent a relapse (return) of the cancer. It involves killing any remaining leukemia cells that may not be active but could begin to regrow. Treatment during both phases also usually includes central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis therapy. This therapy helps prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. It may be high dose chemotherapy or chemotherapy injected into the spinal cord. It also sometimes includes radiation therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your adrenal glands are just above your kidneys. The outside layer of these glands makes hormones that help your body respond to stress and regulate your blood pressure and water and salt balance.  Addison disease happens if the adrenal glands don't make enough of these hormones. A problem with your immune system usually causes Addison disease. The immune system mistakenly attacks your own tissues, damaging your adrenal glands. Other causes include infections and cancer. Symptoms include: Weight loss Muscle weakness Fatigue that gets worse over time Low blood pressure Patchy or dark skin Lab tests can confirm that you have Addison disease.  If you don't treat it, it can be fatal. You will need to take hormone pills for the rest of your life.  If you have Addison disease, you should carry an emergency ID. It should say that you have the disease, list your medicines and say how much you need in an emergency. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

An allergy is a reaction by your immune system to something that does not bother most other people. People who have allergies often are sensitive to more than one thing. Substances that often cause reactions are: Pollen Dust mites Mold spores Pet dander Food Insect stings Medicines Normally, your immune system fights germs. It is your body's defense system. In most allergic reactions, however, it is responding to a false alarm. Genes and the environment probably both play a role. Allergies can cause a variety of symptoms such as a runny nose, sneezing, itching, rashes , swelling, or asthma . Allergies can range from minor to severe. Anaphylaxis is a severe reaction that can be life-threatening.   Doctors use skin and blood tests to diagnose allergies. Treatments include medicines, allergy shots, and avoiding the substances that cause the reactions.

Ankylosing spondylitis is a type of arthritis of the spine. It causes inflammation between your vertebrae, which are the bones that make up your spine, and in the joints between your spine and pelvis. In some people, it can affect other joints. AS is more common and more severe in men. It often runs in families. The cause is unknown, but it is likely that both genes and factors in the environment play a role. Early symptoms of AS include back pain and stiffness. These problems often start in late adolescence or early adulthood. Over time, AS can fuse your vertebrae together, limiting movement. Some people have symptoms that come and go. Others have severe, ongoing pain. A diagnosis of AS is based on your medical history and a physical examination. You may also have imaging or blood tests. AS has no cure, but medicines can relieve symptoms and may keep the disease from getting worse. Eating a healthy diet, not smoking, and exercising can also help. In rare cases, you may need surgery to straighten the spine. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease

What is aplastic anemia? Aplastic anemia is a rare but serious blood disorder.  If you have it, your bone marrow doesn't make enough new blood cells. It happens when there is damage to stem cells inside your bone marrow. There are different types of aplastic anemia, including Fanconi anemia. What causes aplastic anemia? The causes of aplastic anemia can include: Autoimmune disorders , which are the most common cause Certain inherited gene changes, such as the one that can cause Fanconi anemia Toxic substances, such as pesticides , arsenic , and benzene Radiation therapy and chemotherapy for cancer Certain medicines Viral infections such as hepatitis , Epstein-Barr virus, or HIV Pregnancy In many people, the cause is unknown. This is called idiopathic aplastic anemia. What are the symptoms of aplastic anemia? Aplastic anemia can develop suddenly or slowly. It can be mild or severe. The symptoms of aplastic anemia can include: Fatigue Weakness Dizziness Shortness of breath Easy bruising or bleeding What other problems can aplastic anemia cause? Aplastic anemia can cause other problems, including frequent infections and bleeding. It raises your risk of developing a serious blood disorder . If not treated, aplastic anemia can also lead to heart problems such as an arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat), an enlarged heart, or heart failure . How is aplastic anemia diagnosed? To find out if you have aplastic anemia, your doctor will: Take your medical and your family medical histories Do a physical exam Order tests, such as tests to check if you have low numbers of cells in your bone marrow and blood What are the treatments for aplastic anemia? If you have aplastic anemia, your doctor will create a treatment plan for you. The plan will be based on how severe the anemia is and what is causing it. Treatments can include: Blood transfusions Blood and marrow stem cell transplants Medicines to suppress your immune system Because of the risk of blood disorders, your doctor will monitor your condition and screen you for blood disorders regularly. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What are autoimmune diseases? Your immune system protects you from disease and infection by attacking germs that get into your body, such as viruses and bacteria. Your immune system can tell that the germs aren't part of you, so it destroys them. If you have an autoimmune disease, your immune system attacks the healthy cells of your organs and tissues by mistake. There are more than 80 types of autoimmune diseases. They can affect almost any part of your body. For example, alopecia areata is an autoimmune disease of the skin that causes hair loss. Autoimmune hepatitis affects the liver. In type 1 diabetes , the immune system attacks the pancreas.  And in rheumatoid arthritis , the immune system can attack many parts of the body, including the joints, lungs, and eyes. What causes autoimmune diseases? No one is sure why autoimmune diseases happen. But you can't catch them from other people. Autoimmune diseases do tend to run in families, which means that certain genes may make some people more likely to develop a problem. Viruses, certain chemicals, and other things in the environment may trigger an autoimmune disease if you already have the genes for it. Who is at risk for autoimmune diseases? Millions of Americans of all ages have autoimmune diseases. Women develop many types of autoimmune diseases much more often than men. And if you have one autoimmune disease, you are more likely to get another. What are the symptoms of autoimmune diseases? The symptoms of an autoimmune disease depend on the part of your body that's affected. Many types of autoimmune diseases cause redness, swelling, heat, and pain, which are the signs and symptoms of inflammation.  But other illnesses can cause the same symptoms. The symptoms of autoimmune diseases can come and go. During a flare-up, your symptoms may get severe for a while. Later on, you may have a remission, which means that your symptoms get better or disappear for a period of time. How are autoimmune diseases diagnosed? Doctors often have a hard time diagnosing autoimmune diseases. There's usually not a specific test to show whether you have a certain autoimmune disease. And the symptoms can be confusing. That's because many autoimmune diseases have similar symptoms. And some symptoms, such as muscle aches, are common in many other illnesses. So it can take a long time and some visits to different types of doctors to get a diagnosis. To help your doctor find out if an autoimmune disease is causing your symptoms,: Learn about the health conditions in your family history .  What health problems did your grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins have? Write down what you learn and share it with your doctor. Keep track of your symptoms, including how long they last and what makes them better or worse. Share your notes with your doctor. See a specialist who deals with the symptoms that bother you most. For example, if you have rash, see a dermatologist (skin doctor). What are the treatments for autoimmune diseases? The treatment depends on the disease. In most cases, the goal of treatment is to suppress (slow down) your immune system, and ease swelling, redness, and pain from inflammation. Your doctor may give you corticosteroids or other medicines to help you feel better. For some diseases, you may need treatment for the rest of your life.

Bone marrow is the spongy tissue inside some of your bones, such as your hip and thigh bones. It contains stem cells . The stem cells can develop into the red blood cells that carry oxygen through your body, the white blood cells that fight infections, and the platelets that help with blood clotting. With bone marrow disease, there are problems with the stem cells or how they develop: In leukemia , a cancer of the blood, the bone marrow makes abnormal white blood cells In aplastic anemia , the bone marrow doesn't make red blood cells In myeloproliferative disorders, the bone marrow makes too many white blood cells Other diseases, such as lymphoma , can spread into the bone marrow and affect the production of blood cells Causes of bone marrow diseases include genetics and environmental factors. Tests for bone marrow diseases include blood and bone marrow tests. Treatments depend on the disorder and how severe it is. They might involve medicines, blood transfusions or a bone marrow transplant .

Bone marrow is the spongy tissue inside some of your bones, such as your hip and thigh bones. It contains immature cells, called stem cells. The stem cells can develop into red blood cells, which carry oxygen throughout the body, white blood cells, which fight infections, and platelets, which help the blood to clot. A bone marrow transplant is a procedure that replaces a person's faulty bone marrow stem cells. Doctors use these transplants to treat people with certain diseases, such as: Leukemia Severe blood diseases such as thalassemias , aplastic anemia , and sickle cell anemia Multiple myeloma Certain immune deficiency diseases Before you have a transplant, you need to get high doses of chemotherapy and possibly radiation. This destroys the faulty stem cells in your bone marrow. It also suppresses your body's immune system so that it won't attack the new stem cells after the transplant. In some cases, you can donate your own bone marrow stem cells in advance. The cells are saved and then used later on. Or you can get cells from a donor. The donor might be a family member or unrelated person. Bone marrow transplantation has serious risks. Some complications can be life-threatening. But for some people, it is the best hope for a cure or a longer life. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What are the types of leukemia in children? There are different types of leukemia. Some types are acute (fast growing). They usually get worse quickly if they are not treated. Most childhood leukemias are acute: Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) , which is the most common type of leukemia in children and the most common cancer in children . In ALL, the bone marrow makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) , which happens when bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. Other types of leukemia are chronic (slow growing). They usually get worse over a longer period of time. They are rare in children: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is more common in teens than children. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal granulocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is very rare in children. There are some other rare types of leukemia in children, including juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). What causes leukemia in children? Leukemia happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia. Who is at risk for leukemia in children? The factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia include: Having a brother or sister, especially a twin, with leukemia Past treatment with chemotherapy Exposure to radiation , including radiation therapy Having certain genetic conditions , such as Ataxia telangiectasia Down syndrome Fanconi anemia Li-Fraumeni syndrome Neurofibromatosis type 1 There are other factors that may raise the risk of getting one or more of the specific types of childhood leukemia. What are the symptoms of leukemia in children? Some of the symptoms of leukemia may include: Feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Weight loss or loss of appetite Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Other leukemia symptoms can be different from type to type. Chronic leukemia may not cause symptoms at first. How is leukemia in children diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose leukemia: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) Bone marrow tests. There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes Once there is a diagnosis of leukemia, other tests may be done to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture, which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for leukemia in children? The treatments for leukemia depend on which type it is, how severe the leukemia is, the child's age, and other factors. Possible treatments might include: chemotherapy radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Treatment for childhood leukemia is often successful. But the treatments can cause complications right away or later in life. Children who survived leukemia will need follow-up care the rest of their lives to watch for and treat any complications they may have. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What are vaccines? Vaccines are injections (shots), liquids, pills, or nasal sprays that you take to teach the immune system to recognize and defend against harmful germs. The germs could be viruses or bacteria . Some types of vaccines contain germs that cause disease. But the germs have been killed or weakened enough that they won't make your child sick. Some vaccines only contain a part of a germ. Other types of vaccines include instructions for your cells to make a protein of the germ. These different vaccine types all spark an immune response, which helps the body fight off the germs. Your child's immune system will also remember the germ and attack it if that germ ever invades again. This protection against a certain disease is called immunity. Why do I need to vaccinate my child? Babies are born with immune systems that can fight most germs, but there are some serious diseases they can't handle. That's why they need vaccines to strengthen their immune system. These diseases once killed or harmed many infants, children, and adults. But now with vaccines, your child can get immunity from these diseases without having to get sick. And for a few vaccines, getting vaccinated can actually give you a better immune response than getting the disease would. Vaccinating your child also protects others. Normally, germs can travel quickly through a community and make a lot of people sick. If enough people get sick, it can lead to an outbreak. But when enough people are vaccinated against a certain disease, it's harder for that disease to spread to others. The entire community is less likely to get the disease. This is called "community immunity." Community immunity is especially important for the people who can't get certain vaccines. For example, they may not be able to get a vaccine because they have weakened immune systems. Others may be allergic to certain vaccine ingredients. And newborn babies are too young to get some vaccines. Community immunity can help to protect them all. Are vaccines safe for children? Vaccines are safe . They must go through extensive safety testing and evaluation before they are approved in the United States. Some people worry that childhood vaccines could cause autism spectrum disorder (ASD). But many scientific studies have looked at this and have found no link between vaccines and autism. Can vaccines overload my child's immune system? No, vaccines do not overload the immune system. Every day, a healthy child's immune system successfully fights off thousands of germs. When your child gets vaccines, they are getting weakened or dead germs. So even if they get several vaccines in one day, they are being exposed to a tiny amount of germs compared to what they encounter every day in their environment. When do I need to vaccinate my child? Your child will get vaccines during well-child visits . They will be given according to the vaccine schedule. This schedule lists which vaccines are recommended for children. It includes who should get the vaccines, how many doses they need, and at what age they should get them. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes the vaccine schedule. Following the vaccine schedule allows your child to get protection from the diseases at exactly the right time. It gives their body the chance to build up immunity before being exposed to these very serious diseases.

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a type of chronic leukemia. "Chronic" means that the leukemia usually gets worse slowly. In CLL, the bone marrow makes abnormal lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). When the abnormal cells crowd out the healthy cells, it can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding . The abnormal cells can also spread outside the blood to other parts of the body.
CLL is one of the most common types of leukemia in adults. It often occurs during or after middle age. It is rare in children . What causes chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? CLL happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown, so it's hard to predict who might get CLL. There are a few factors that might raise your risk. Who is at risk for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? It is hard to predict who will get CLL. There are a few factors that could raise your risk: Age - your risk goes up as you get older. Most people who are diagnosed with CLL are over 50. Family history of CLL and other blood and bone marrow diseases Racial/ethnic group - CLL is more common in whites than in people from other racial or ethnic groups Exposure to certain chemicals, including Agent Orange, a chemical that was used in the Vietnam War What are the symptoms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? In the beginning, CLL does not cause any symptoms. Later, you can have symptoms such as: Swollen lymph nodes - you may notice them as painless lumps in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin Weakness or feeling tired Pain or a feeling of fullness below the ribs Fever and infection Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Weight loss for no known reason Drenching night sweats How is chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose CLL: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) with differential and blood chemistry tests. Blood chemistry tests measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and an electrolyte panel . Flow cytometry tests, which check for leukemia cells and identify which type of leukemia it is. The tests can be done on blood, bone marrow, or other tissue. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with CLL, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and bone marrow tests . What are the treatments for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? Treatments for CLL include: Watchful waiting, which means that you don't get treatment right away. Your health care provider regularly checks to see if your signs or symptoms appear or change. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Immunotherapy Chemotherapy with bone marrow or stem cell transplant The goals of treatment are to slow the growth of the leukemia cells and to give you long periods of remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The CLL may come back after remission, and you may need more treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Diabetes means your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too 
high.  With type 1 diabetes, your pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that 
helps glucose get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much glucose 
stays in your blood.  Over time, high blood glucose can lead to serious problems with your heart , eyes , kidneys , nerves , and gums and teeth. Type 1 diabetes happens most often in children and young adults but can appear at any 
age. Symptoms may include: Being very thirsty Urinating often Feeling very hungry or tired Losing weight without trying Having sores that heal slowly Having dry, itchy skin Losing the feeling in your feet or having tingling in your feet Having blurry eyesight A blood test can show if you have diabetes. If you do, you will need to take insulin for 
the rest of your life. A blood test called the A1C can check to see how well you are managing your diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is a food allergy? A food allergy is an abnormal immune system reaction to certain foods. Your immune system normally protects you from germs. But if you have a food allergy, your immune system mistakenly reacts to certain foods as if they were harmful. This reaction is usually mild. But in some cases, it can be serious or even life-threatening. A food intolerance is different than a food allergy. If you have a food intolerance, you also have symptoms when you eat that food. But these are typically just digestive symptoms such as bloating and gas . Also, an intolerance is not an immune system reaction. Most food allergies are caused by: Cow's milk Chicken eggs Crustacean shellfish, such as shrimp, crab, lobster, and crayfish Fish Peanuts Sesame Soy Tree nuts, such as almonds, walnuts, pecans Wheat People with a food allergy may be allergic to more than one type of food. Who is more likely to develop a food allergy? Both children and adults can have food allergies. Some children will outgrow their food allergies. And sometimes people can develop food allergies as adult. Certain factors can make you more likely to have a food allergy. They include: Having eczema , a disease that causes inflammation, redness, and irritation of the skin. Your immune system also plays a role in eczema. Having asthma or other allergies , such as hay fever . Your genes. Certain genes may influence the development of food allergies. And you are more likely to have food allergies if someone in your family has allergies, asthma, or eczema. What are the symptoms of food allergies? If you are allergic to a food you have eaten, you may have a variety of symptoms. These symptoms are not always the same for every person. And the symptoms that you get each time you eat the food may not always be the same. For example, your symptoms may sometimes depend on how much of the food you ate. Food allergy symptoms usually start within a few minutes to two hours after you eat that food. They may include: Hives Flushed skin or rash Tingling or itchy sensation in the mouth Face, tongue, or lip swelling Vomiting and/or diarrhea Abdominal (belly) cramps Coughing or wheezing Dizziness and/or lightheadedness Swelling of the throat and vocal cords Trouble breathing In rare cases, a food allergy can cause a life-threatening reaction called anaphylaxis . It may start out with some milder symptoms, but then it becomes more serious. It can lead to: Narrowed airways in the lungs Severe trouble breathing because of swelling in the throat Severe lowering of blood pressure and shock ("anaphylactic shock") Loss of consciousness This is a medical emergency. Call 911 if someone is having the symptoms of anaphylaxis. How are food allergies diagnosed? To find out if you have a food allergy, your health care provider will Ask about your symptoms, family health history, and medical history, including other allergies. Likely do a physical exam. Do food allergy testing . This could involve skin testing, blood testing, a food elimination diet, and/or an oral food challenge test. An oral food challenge test is the most accurate food allergy test. What are the treatments for food allergies? There is no cure for food allergies. The only way to prevent a reaction is to avoid eating the food that you are allergic to. There are medicines for people with food allergies. They include: Medicines to reduce food allergy symptoms, including antihistamines and corticosteroids . Medicines to reduce allergic reactions, including severe reactions. Epinephrine, a medicine to treat anaphylaxis. Your provider may give you a prescription for an epinephrine auto-injector. It is a device used to inject epinephrine when someone is having symptoms of anaphylaxis. If you have been prescribed one, it's important to learn how to use it and to carry it with you at all times. If you have a food allergy, it's a good idea to have a medical alert bracelet that says what your allergy is.

What is HIV? HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. HIV harms your immune system by destroying a type of white blood cell that helps your body fight infection. This puts you at risk for other infections and diseases. What is AIDS? AIDS stands for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. It is the final stage of infection with HIV. It happens when the body's immune system is badly damaged because of the virus. Not everyone with HIV develops AIDS. How does HIV spread? HIV is spread through certain body fluids from a person who has HIV. This can happen: By having unprotected vaginal or anal sex with a person who has HIV. "Unprotected" means not using condoms or medicine to treat or prevent HIV. This is the most common way that it spreads. By sharing drug needles. Through contact with the blood of a person with HIV. From mother to baby during pregnancy , childbirth, or breastfeeding. Who is at risk for HIV infection? Anyone can get HIV, but certain groups have a higher risk of getting it: People who have another sexually transmitted infection (STI). Having an STI can increase your risk of getting or spreading HIV. People who inject drugs with shared needles. Gay and bisexual men. Black/African Americans and Hispanic/Latino Americans. They make up a higher proportion of new HIV diagnoses and people with HIV, compared to other races and ethnicities. People who engage in risky sexual behaviors, such as not using condoms or medicine to prevent or treat HIV. Factors such as stigma, discrimination, income, education, and geographic region can also affect people's risk for HIV. What are the symptoms of HIV? The first signs of HIV infection may be flu-like symptoms: Fever Chills Rash Night sweats (heavy sweating during sleep) Muscle aches Sore throat Fatigue Swollen lymph nodes Mouth ulcers These symptoms may come and go within two to four weeks. This stage is called acute HIV infection. If the infection is not treated, it becomes chronic HIV infection. Often, there are no symptoms during this stage. If it is not treated, eventually the virus will weaken your body's immune system. Then the infection will progress to AIDS. This is the late stage of HIV infection. Because your immune system is badly damaged, your body cannot fight off other infections, called opportunistic infections (OIs). OIs are infections that happen more frequently or are more severe in people who have weakened immune systems. Some people may not feel sick during the earlier stages of HIV infection. So the only way to know for sure whether you have HIV is to get tested. How do I know if I have HIV? A blood test can tell if you have HIV infection. Your health care provider can do the test, or you can use a home testing kit. You can also use the CDC Testing Locator to find free testing sites. What are the treatments for HIV? There is no cure for HIV infection, but it can be treated with medicines . This is called antiretroviral therapy (ART).  ART can make HIV infection a manageable chronic condition. It also reduces the risk of spreading the virus to others. Most people with HIV live long and healthy lives if they get ART as soon as possible and stay on it. It's also important to take care of yourself. Making sure that you have the support you need, living a healthy lifestyle, and getting regular medical care can help you enjoy a better quality of life . Can HIV infection be prevented? You can reduce the risk of getting or spreading HIV by: Getting tested for HIV. Choosing less risky sexual behaviors. This includes limiting the number of sexual partners you have and using latex condoms every time you have sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Getting tested and treated for sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Not injecting drugs. Talking to your health care provider about medicines to prevent HIV : PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) is for people who don't already have HIV but are at very high risk of getting it. PrEP is daily medicine that can reduce this risk. PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) is for people who have possibly been exposed to HIV. It is only for emergency situations. PEP must be started within 72 hours after a possible exposure to HIV. NIH: National Institutes of Health

What are opportunistic infections (OIs) in HIV? Having HIV weakens your body's immune system. It destroys the white blood cells that fight infection. This puts you at risk for opportunistic infections (OIs). OIs are serious infections that take advantage of your weak immune system. These infections are less common and less severe in healthy people. People who have AIDS, the most severe stage of HIV infection, have badly damaged immune systems. This puts them especially at risk for OIs. Getting certain OIs is one of the ways that people can get diagnosed with AIDS. OIs are becoming less common in people with HIV because of effective HIV medicines . But some people with HIV still develop OIs for different reasons: They may not know they have HIV, so they aren't getting treatment for it They know that they have HIV but are not taking treatment Their HIV treatment may not be working properly What are the different types of opportunistic infections (OIs)? There are many types of OIs: Bacterial infections , including tuberculosis , Salmonella infection , and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) Viral infections , such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) and herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) Fungal infections , like yeast infections , Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), and histoplasmosis Parasitic infections , such as cryptosporidiosis and toxoplasmosis Having HIV can make infections harder to treat. People with HIV are also more likely to have complications from common illnesses such as the flu. What are the treatments for opportunistic infections (OIs)? If you develop an OI, there are treatments available such as antiviral, antibiotic , and antifungal drugs. The type of medicine your health care provider prescribes will depend on which OI you have. After the OI has been successfully treated, you may still need to take the same medicine or another medicine to prevent the OI from coming back. Can opportunistic infections (OIs) be prevented? The best way to prevent OIs infections is by taking your HIV medicines. Other steps you can take to help prevent OIs include: Avoiding exposure to contaminated food and water : Don't undercooked eggs, unpasteurized dairy products or fruit juices, or raw seed sprouts Don't drink water directly from a lake or river Talking to your provider about medicines and vaccines that prevent certain OIs Preventing exposure to other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) by using condoms every time you have sex Washing your hands thoroughly with warm, soapy water after any contact with human or animal feces (poop) Not sharing needles, syringes, or other drug injection equipment

If you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant, it's important to get tested for HIV as soon as possible. If you find out that do have HIV , you can start treatment right away to protect your health and the health of your baby. If I have HIV, can I pass it on to my baby during pregnancy? If you are pregnant and have HIV, there is a risk of passing HIV to your baby. It can happen in three ways: During pregnancy During childbirth, especially if it is vaginal childbirth During breastfeeding But having HIV doesn't mean that you can't have children. Treatment with a combination of HIV medicines can help prevent passing HIV to your baby and protect your own health. If I have HIV, how can I prevent giving it to my baby? There are several different steps you can take to help prevent passing HIV to your baby: Taking HIV medicines . HIV medicines reduce the amount of HIV in the body (viral load) to a very low level. The goal is to get your viral load so low that a standard lab test can't detect it. This is called having an "undetectable viral load." Having an undetectable viral load is the best thing you can do to stay healthy and prevent your baby from getting HIV. These medicines will also help protect your health. Most HIV medicines are safe to use during pregnancy. They don't usually raise the risk of birth defects . But it is important to talk with your health care provider about the risks and benefits of the different medicines. Together you can decide which medicines are right for you. Then you need to make sure you take your medicines regularly. If needed, having a cesarean delivery . If your viral load is not reduced enough by the medicines, having a cesarean delivery (C-Section) can help prevent passing HIV to your baby. Giving HIV medicines to the baby. Your baby will get HIV medicines as soon as possible after birth. The medicines protect your baby from infection from any HIV that passed from you during childbirth. Which medicine your baby gets depends on several factors, including what your viral load was just before you gave birth. Your baby will need to take medicines for 4 to 6 weeks. He or she will get several HIV tests over the first few months. Not breastfeeding. Breast milk can have HIV in it. In the United States, infant formula is safe and readily available. So the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend that if you have HIV, you should feed your baby formula instead of breastfeeding. What if I want to get pregnant and my partner has HIV? If you are trying to get pregnant, it's important for your partner to also get tested for HIV. If your partner does have HIV and you do not, talk to your provider about taking PrEP . PrEP stands for pre-exposure prophylaxis. This means taking medicines to prevent HIV. The PrEP helps to protect both you and your baby from HIV.

Hives are red and sometimes itchy bumps on your skin. An allergic reaction to a drug or food usually causes them. Allergic reactions cause your body to release chemicals that can make your skin swell up in hives. People who have other allergies are more likely to get hives than other people.  Other causes include infections  and stress. Hives are very common.  They usually go away on their own, but if you have a serious case, you might need medicine or a shot. In rare cases, hives can cause a dangerous swelling in your airways, making it hard to breathe - which is a medical emergency.

What is HIV? HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. It harms your immune system by destroying a type of white blood cell that helps your body fight infection. This puts you at risk for other infections and diseases. How does HIV spread? HIV can spread in different ways: By having unprotected vaginal or anal sex with a person who has HIV. "Unprotected" means not using condoms or medicine to treat or prevent HIV. This is the most common way it spreads. Anal sex is the riskiest type of sex for getting or spreading HIV. The rectum's lining is thin and may allow HIV to enter the body during anal sex. During vaginal sex, HIV can enter the body through the delicate tissue that lines the vagina and cervix. Rarely, through oral sex with a person who has HIV. By sharing drug needles. Through contact with the blood of a person who has HIV. From mother to baby during pregnancy , childbirth, or breastfeeding. How does HIV affect women differently from men? About one in four people in the United States who have HIV are women. Women who have HIV have some different problems from men: Complications such as Repeated vaginal yeast infections Severe pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) A higher risk of cervical cancer Menstrual cycle problems A higher risk of osteoporosis A higher risk of heart disease , especially heart attacks Entering menopause younger or having more severe hot flashes Different, sometimes more severe, side effects from the medicines that treat HIV Drug interactions between some HIV medicines and hormonal birth control The risk of giving HIV to their baby while pregnancy or during childbirth Are there treatments for HIVS? There is no cure, but there are many medicines to treat both HIV infection and the infections and cancers that come with it. People who get early treatment can live longer and healthier lives .

What is Hodgkin lymphoma? Hodgkin lymphoma, also called Hodgkin disease, is a type of cancer that develops in the lymph system. Your lymph system is part of your immune system . It helps protect your body from infection and disease. The lymph system is made up of tissues and organs that produce, store, and carry white blood cells. It includes your: Bone marrow Lymph nodes Lymphatic vessels Spleen Thymus Tonsils Hodgkin lymphoma is one of the main types of lymphoma . The other is non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Each type starts in different types of white blood cells. What causes Hodgkin lymphoma? The cause of Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown. But there are certain people who are at higher risk of developing it. Who is more likely to develop Hodgkin lymphoma? Certain factors can make you more likely to develop Hodgkin lymphoma: Age. Hodgkin lymphoma is most common in early adulthood (age 20-39 years) and in late adulthood (age 65 years and older). Being male. The risk of adult Hodgkin lymphoma is slightly higher in males than in females. Past Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Having an infection with EBV as a young child or teenager increases your risk of Hodgkin lymphoma. A family history of Hodgkin lymphoma. Having a parent or sibling with Hodgkin lymphoma increases your risk of developing it. What are the symptoms of Hodgkin lymphoma? The signs and symptoms of Hodgkin lymphoma may include: Painless, swollen lymph nodes in the neck, underarm, or groin Fever for no known reason Drenching night sweats (very heavy sweating during sleep) Weight loss for no known reason in the past 6 months Itchy skin, especially after bathing or drinking alcohol Fatigue How is Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosed? To find out if you have Hodgkin lymphoma, your provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history. This will include checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. May order some lab tests, such as: Complete blood count Blood chemistry studies Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) test Blood tests to rule out other medical conditions May do imaging tests such as a CT and PET (positron emission tomography) scans May do a lymph node biopsy What are the treatments for Hodgkin lymphoma? Treatments for Hodgkin lymphoma include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Cancer immunotherapy Hodgkin lymphoma can usually be cured if it is found and treated early. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is the immune system? Your immune system is a complex network of cells, tissues, and organs. Together they help the body fight infections and other diseases. When germs such as bacteria or viruses invade your body, they attack and multiply. This is called an infection. The infection causes the disease that makes you sick. Your immune system protects you from the disease by fighting off the germs. What are the parts of the immune system? The immune system has many different parts, including: Your skin, which can help prevent germs from getting into the body Mucous membranes, which are the moist, inner linings of some organs and body cavities. They make mucus and other substances which can trap and fight germs. White blood cells, which fight germs Organs and tissues of the lymph system , such as the thymus, spleen , tonsils, lymph nodes, lymph vessels, and bone marrow .  They produce, store, and carry white blood cells. How does the immune system work? Your immune system defends your body against substances it sees as harmful or foreign. These substances are called antigens. They may be germs such as bacteria and viruses. They might be chemicals or toxins. They could also be cells that are damaged from things like cancer or sunburn . When your immune system recognizes an antigen, it attacks it. This is called an immune response. Part of this response is to make antibodies. Antibodies are proteins that work to attack, weaken, and destroy antigens. Your body also makes other cells to fight the antigen. Afterwards, your immune system remembers the antigen. If it sees the antigen again, it can recognize it. It will quickly send out the right antibodies, so in most cases, you don't get sick. This protection against a certain disease is called immunity. What are the types of immunity? There are three different types of immunity: Innate immunity is the protection that you are born with. It is your body's first line of defense. It includes barriers such as the skin and mucous membranes. They keep harmful substances from entering the body. It also includes some cells and chemicals which can attack foreign substances. Active immunity , also called adaptive immunity, develops when you are infected with or vaccinated against a foreign substance. Active immunity is usually long-lasting. For many diseases, it can last your entire life. Passive immunity happens when you receive antibodies to a disease instead of making them through your own immune system. For example, newborn babies have antibodies from their mothers. People can also get passive immunity through blood products that contain antibodies. This kind of immunity gives you protection right away. But it only lasts a few weeks or months. What can go wrong with the immune system? Sometimes a person may have an immune response even though there is no real threat. This can lead to problems such as allergies , asthma , and autoimmune diseases . If you have an autoimmune disease, your immune system attacks healthy cells in your body by mistake. Other immune system problems happen when your immune system does not work correctly. These problems include immunodeficiency diseases. If you have an immunodeficiency disease, you get sick more often. Your infections may last longer and can be more serious and harder to treat. They are often genetic disorders . There are other diseases that can affect your immune system. For example, HIV is a virus that harms your immune system by destroying your white blood cells. If HIV is not treated, it can lead to AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). People with AIDS have badly damaged immune systems. They get an increasing number of severe illnesses.

What are infectious diseases? Germs, or microbes, are found everywhere - in the air, soil, and water.  There are also germs on your skin and in your body.  Many of them are harmless, and some can even be helpful. But some of them can make you sick. Infectious diseases are diseases that are caused by germs. What are the different types of germs that cause infectious diseases? There are four main types of germs: Bacteria are one-celled germs that multiply quickly. They may give off toxins, which are harmful chemicals that can make you sick. Strep throat and urinary tract infections are common bacterial infections. Viruses are tiny capsules that contain genetic material. They invade your cells so that they can multiply. This can kill, damage, or change the cells and make you sick. Viral infections include HIV and the common cold . Fungi are primitive plant-like organisms such as mushrooms, mold, mildew, and yeasts. Athlete's foot and yeast infections are common fungal infections. Parasites are animals or plants that survive by living on or in other living things. Malaria and head lice are infections that are caused by parasites. How can you get infectious diseases? There are many different ways that you can get an infectious disease, depending on the type of germ. They can include: Through direct contact with a person who is sick. This includes kissing, touching, sneezing, coughing, and sexual contact. Pregnant people can also pass some germs along to their babies. Through indirect contact, when you touch something that has germs on it. For example, you could get germs if someone who is sick touched a door handle, and then you touch it. Through insect or animal bites. Through contaminated food , water, soil, or plants. What are the symptoms of infectious diseases? Infectious diseases can cause many different symptoms. Some are so mild that you may not even notice any symptoms, while others can be life-threatening. What are the treatments for infectious diseases? There are treatments for some infectious diseases, such as antibiotic , antiviral, antifungal and anti-parasitic medicines. But for other infections, such as some caused by viruses, you can only treat your symptoms while you wait for your immune system to fight off the germ. Can infectious diseases be prevented? You can take steps to help prevent many infectious diseases: Get vaccinated . Wash your hands often . Pay attention to food safety . Avoid contact with wild animals. Use a latex condom every time you have sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Don't share items such as toothbrushes, combs, and straws.

What is infectious mononucleosis (mono)? Infectious mononucleosis (mono) is a disease caused by viruses .The most common cause is the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Mono is contagious, which means it can spread from person to person. It is common among teenagers and young adults, especially college students. What causes infectious mononucleosis (mono)? Mono can be caused by many different viruses. But it is most often caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). EBV is found all over the world. Most people get an EBV infection at some point in their lives, but only some of them will get the symptoms of mono. EBV infections often happen during childhood or when someone is a young adult. EBV infections in children usually do not cause symptoms. And when they do, it's hard to tell the difference between the symptoms of mono and the symptoms of other common childhood illnesses such as the flu . Teens and young adults who get EBV are more likely to have symptoms that are typical of mono. EBV and the other viruses that cause mono are usually spread through body fluids, especially saliva (spit). This means that you can get it through kissing. That's why mono is sometimes called "the kissing disease." But you can also get these viruses if you share food, drinks, forks, spoons, or lip balm with someone who has mono. Other less common ways of getting an infection are through blood transfusions , organ transplants , and blood and semen during sexual contact. What are the symptoms of infectious mononucleosis (mono)? The symptoms of mono usually start four to six weeks after you get the infection. But they may start sooner in young children. The symptoms often develop slowly, and they may not all happen at the same time. They can include: Extreme fatigue Fever Sore throat Head and body aches Swollen lymph glands in your neck and armpits Rash Swollen liver, spleen, or both (these are less common symptoms) Most people get better in two to four weeks. However, some people may feel fatigued for several more weeks. Occasionally, the symptoms can last for six months or longer. How is infectious mononucleosis (mono) diagnosed? Your healthcare provider may diagnose mono based on your symptoms and a physical exam. The exam will include checking to see if your lymph nodes, tonsils, liver, or spleen are swollen. In some cases, your provider might also order a mono test to confirm the diagnosis. What are the treatments for infectious mononucleosis (mono)? Drinking plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration . Getting lots of rest. Taking over-the-counter medications for pain and fever. But don't give aspirin to children or teens because it may cause Reye syndrome . This syndrome is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. If you have severe symptoms, your provider may suggest additional treatment based on which organs in your body are affected by the mono. Antibiotics don't treat viral infections, so they do not help with mono. Some people do get bacterial infections such as strep throat along with mono. In that case, you probably need antibiotics to treat the bacterial infection. But you should not take penicillin antibiotics like ampicillin or amoxicillin. Those antibiotics can cause a rash in people who have mono. Mono can cause an enlarged spleen, which could rupture and cause a medical emergency. To try to protect the spleen, providers recommend avoiding intense exercise and contact sports until you fully recover (about a month). Can infectious mononucleosis (mono) be prevented? There is no vaccine to protect against mono. To lower your chance of getting or spreading mono: Don't share food, drinks, forks, spoons, or lip balm with anyone, especially if you or the other person has mono. Don't kiss someone if you or the other person has mono. Wash your hands often with soap and water. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Juvenile arthritis (JA) is arthritis that happens in children. It causes joint swelling, pain, stiffness, and loss of motion. It can affect any joint, but is more common in the knees, hands, and feet. In some cases it can affect internal organs as well. The most common type of JA that children get is juvenile idiopathic arthritis. There are several other forms of arthritis affecting children. One early sign of JA may be limping in the morning. Symptoms can come and go. Some children have just one or two flare-ups. Others have symptoms that never go away. JA can cause growth problems and eye inflammation in some children. No one knows exactly what causes JA. Most types are autoimmune disorders . This means that your immune system, which normally helps your body fight infection, attacks your body's own tissues. JA can be hard to diagnose. Your health care provider may do a physical exam, lab tests, and x-rays. A team of providers usually treats JA. Medicines and physical therapy can help maintain movement and reduce swelling and pain. They may also help prevent and treat complications. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease is a rare illness that usually affects small children. Other names for the disease are Kawasaki syndrome and mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. It is a type of vasculitis , which is inflammation of the blood vessels. Kawasaki disease is serious, but most children can fully recover if they are treated right away. What causes Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease happens when the immune system injures the blood vessels by mistake. Researchers do not fully know why this happens. But when it does, the blood vessels become inflamed and can narrow or close off. Genetics may play a role in Kawasaki disease. There may also be environmental factors, such as infections. It does not seem to be contagious. This means that it cannot be passed from one child to another. Who is more likely to develop Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease usually affects children under the age of 5. But older children and adults can sometimes get it. It is more common in boys than girls. It can affect children of any race, but those with Asian or Pacific Islander descent are more likely to get it. What are the symptoms of Kawasaki disease? The symptoms of Kawasaki disease may include: High fever lasting at least five days A rash , often on the back, chest, and groin Swollen hands and feet Redness of the lips, lining of the mouth, tongue, palms of the hand, and soles of the feet Pink eye (conjunctivitis) Swollen lymph nodes in the neck Contact your child's health care provider if your child has a fever for 4 days, especially if they have any other symptoms of Kawasaki disease. What other problems can Kawasaki disease cause? Sometimes Kawasaki disease can affect the walls of the coronary arteries. These arteries bring blood and oxygen to your heart. This can lead to: An aneurysm (bulging and thinning of the walls of the arteries). This can raise the risk of blood clots in the arteries. If the blood clots are not treated, they could lead to a heart attack or internal bleeding. Inflammation in the heart. Heart valve problems . Kawasaki disease can also affect other parts of the body, including the brain and nervous system, the immune system, and the digestive system. How is Kawasaki disease diagnosed? There is no specific test for Kawasaki disease. To find out if your child has Kawasaki disease, your child's provider: Will do a physical exam, which includes looking at the signs and symptoms Will likely order blood and urine tests to rule out other diseases and check for signs of inflammation May order tests to check for damage to the heart, such as an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (EKG) What are the treatments for Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease is usually treated in the hospital with an intravenous (IV) dose of immunoglobulin (IVIG) antibodies. Antibodies are proteins that your immune system makes to fight infections. Aspirin may also be part of the treatment. But do not give your child aspirin unless the health care provider tells you to. Aspirin can cause Reye syndrome in children. This is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. Treatment usually works. But if it is not working well enough, the provider may also give your child other medicines to fight the inflammation. If the disease affects your child's heart, they might need additional medicines, surgery, or other medical procedures.

Latex is a milky fluid that comes from the tropical rubber tree. Hundreds of everyday products contain latex. Repeated exposure to a protein in natural latex can make you more likely to develop a latex allergy. If your immune system detects the protein, a reaction can start in minutes. You could get a rash or asthma. In rare cases you could have a severe reaction called anaphylaxis . Your doctor may use a physical exam and skin and blood tests to diagnose it. There are medicines to treat a reaction, but it is best to try to avoid latex. Common latex products include: Gloves Condoms Balloons Rubber bands Shoe soles Pacifiers You can find latex-free versions of these products.

What are HIV and AIDS? HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. It harms your immune system by destroying a type of white blood cell that helps your body fight infection. AIDS is the final stage of infection with HIV. It happens when the body's immune system is badly damaged because of the virus. Not everyone with HIV develops AIDS. Are there treatments for HIV? There is no cure for HIV, but there are many medicines to treat both HIV infection and the  health problems and infections (called opportunistic infections, or OIs) that come with it. The medicines allow people with HIV to have long, healthy lives. How can I live a healthier life with HIV? IIf you have HIV, you can help yourself by: Getting medical care as soon as you find out that you have HIV. You should find a health care provider who has experience in treating HIV. Taking your medicines every day. Letting your provider know if you get any new symptoms or health problems. Keeping up with your regular medical and dental care .This includes staying up to date with your recommended health screenings and vaccinations . Your provider can let you know which ones you need. Managing stress and getting support, such as from support groups, therapists, and social service organizations Trying to live a healthy lifestyle, including: Eating healthy foods.This can give your body the energy it needs to fight HIV and other infections. It can help you manage HIV symptoms and medicine side effects . It may also improve absorption of your HIV medicines. Getting regular physical activity . This can strengthen your body and immune system. It may also reduce the risk of depression . Getting enough sleep . Sleep is important for your physical strength and mental health. Not smoking. People with HIV who smoke have a higher risk of developing conditions such as certain cancers and infections. Smoking can also interfere with your medicines. Talk to your provider if you need help quitting smoking . Avoiding heavy drinking or taking illegal drugs . They can damage your liver, which means your HIV medicine may not work as well. They can also make it harder for your body to fight infections. Protecting yourself from OIs. Talk to your provider about medicines and vaccines that prevent certain OIs. Also, be careful to avoid exposure to contaminated food and water . It is also important to reduce the risk of spreading HIV to other people. You should tell your sex partners that you have HIV and always use latex condoms. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms.

What is lupus? Lupus is a chronic (long-lasting) type of autoimmune disease .Autoimmune diseases happen when your immune system attacks healthy cells and tissues by mistake. This attack causes inflammation. It can also damage many parts of the body, including the joints, skin, kidneys, heart, lungs, and brain. There are several types of lupus: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the most common type. It can be mild or severe and can affect many parts of the body. Cutaneous lupus affects the skin. It causes a rash or sores, usually after your skin is exposed to sunlight . The two major types of cutaneous lupus are discoid lupus and subacute cutaneous lupus. Drug-induced lupus is caused by a reaction to some medicines. The symptoms may start 3 to 6 months after starting the medicine. The symptoms usually go away when you stop taking the medicine. Neonatal lupus, which is rare, affects newborns. It is caused by certain antibodies that are passed from the pregnant parent to the baby. What causes lupus? The cause of lupus is unknown. Researchers are studying what might cause or trigger the disease, such as: Genetics Environmental factors, such as viral infections , sunlight, certain medicines, and smoking Problems with the immune system Who is more likely to get lupus? Anyone can get lupus, but women get it much more often than men. Lupus is more common in African Americans than in White people. It is also more common in people of American Indian and Asian descent.  African American and Hispanic women are more likely to have severe forms of lupus. What are the symptoms of lupus? Lupus can have many symptoms, and they differ from person to person. Some of the more common ones are: Arthritis , causing painful and swollen joints and morning stiffness Fever Fatigue or feeling tired often Red rashes , most often on the face (also called the "butterfly rash") Chest pain when taking a deep breath Hair loss Pale or purple fingers or toes, from cold and stress ( Raynaud phenomenon ) Sensitivity to the sun Swelling in legs or around eyes Mouth ulcers Swollen glands Headache and dizziness Confusion and memory problems Symptoms may come and go. When you are having symptoms, it is called a flare.  Flares can range from mild to severe. New symptoms may appear at any time. What other problems can lupus cause? Lupus causes inflammation throughout your body. This can cause problems in your organs, including: Kidney damage (lupus nephritis). Heart problems , including inflammation in the heart (myocarditis), heart valves , or lining of the heart muscle ( pericarditis ). Inflammation of blood vessels ( vasculitis ). Blood clots Inflammation of the tissue that surrounds the lungs ( pleurisy ). This can make it painful to breathe. Some people with lupus may be more likely to develop other conditions, such as coronary artery disease (CAD) and atherosclerosis . How is lupus diagnosed? There is no specific test for lupus, and it's often mistaken for other diseases that cause similar symptoms. So it may take a while to get a diagnosis. To find out if you have lupus, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms, medical history, and family health history Will do a complete physical exam May order blood tests, such as ANA (antinuclear antibody) , antibodies, complete blood count , and complement tests May order other tests, such as urine tests May do biopsies : Skin biopsy (looking at skin samples under a microscope) Kidney biopsy (looking at tissue from your kidney under a microscope) What are the treatments for lupus? There is no cure for lupus, but medicines and lifestyle changes can help control it. People with lupus often need to see different providers. You will most likely have a primary care provider and a rheumatologist (a doctor who specializes in diseases of the joints and muscles). Which other specialists you will depend on how lupus affects your body. For example, if lupus is damaging your heart or blood vessels, you would see a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases). Your primary care provider should coordinate care between all of your other providers and treat other problems as they come up. You and your primary care provider will develop a treatment plan to fit your needs. You will both review the plan often to make sure that it is working. You should report new symptoms to your provider right away so that your treatment plan can be changed, if needed. The goals of a treatment plan are to: Prevent flares Treat flares when they occur Reduce organ damage and other problems Improve your quality of life Treatments may include drugs to: Reduce fever, swelling, and pain Reduce inflammation in your body Prevent or reduce flares Reduce or prevent damage to joints Suppress (lower) the activity of your immune system Besides taking medicines for lupus, you may need to take medicines for problems that are related to lupus such as high cholesterol , high blood pressure , or infection. Alternative and complementary therapies are therapies that are not part of standard treatments. Some people try alternative and complementary therapies to improve their lupus symptoms. But research has not clearly shown whether these treatments may help or treat lupus. Talk to your provider before trying any new treatments. How can I cope with lupus? It is important to take an active role in your treatment. It helps to learn more about lupus - being able to spot the warning signs of a flare can help you prevent the flare or make the symptoms less severe. It is also important to find ways to cope with the stress of having lupus. Exercising and finding ways to relax may make it easier for you to cope. A good support system can also help. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

The lymphatic system is a network of tissues and organs. It is made up of: Lymph - a fluid that contains white blood cells that defend against germs Lymph vessels - vessels that carry lymph throughout your body.  They are different from blood vessels. Lymph nodes - glands found throughout the lymph vessels. Along with your spleen , these nodes are where white blood cells fight infection. Your bone marrow and thymus produce the cells in lymph. They are part of the system, too. The lymphatic system clears away infection and keeps your body fluids in balance. If it's not working properly, fluid builds in your tissues and causes swelling, called lymphedema . Other lymphatic system problems can include infections, blockage, and cancer .

Lymphedema is the name of a type of swelling . It happens when lymph builds up in your body's soft tissues.  Lymph is a fluid that contains white blood cells that defend against germs. It can build up when the lymph system is damaged or blocked. It usually happens in the arms or legs. Causes of lymphedema include: Infection Cancer Scar tissue from radiation therapy or surgical removal of lymph nodes Inherited conditions in which lymph nodes or vessels are absent or abnormal Treatment can help control symptoms.  It includes exercise, compression devices, skin care, and massage. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Lymphoma is a cancer of a part of the immune system called the lymph system.  There are many types of lymphoma.  One type is Hodgkin disease .  The rest are called non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas begin when a type of white blood cell, called a T cell or B cell, becomes abnormal. The cell divides again and again, making more and more abnormal cells. These abnormal cells can spread to almost any other part of the body. Most of the time, doctors don't know why a person gets non-Hodgkin lymphoma. You are at increased risk if you have a weakened immune system or have certain types of infections. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma can cause many symptoms, such as : Swollen, painless lymph nodes in the neck, armpits or groin Unexplained weight loss Fever Soaking night sweats Coughing, trouble breathing or chest pain Weakness and tiredness that don't go away Pain, swelling or a feeling of fullness in the abdomen Your doctor will diagnose lymphoma with a physical exam, blood tests, a chest x-ray, and a biopsy.  Treatments include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, biological therapy, or therapy to remove proteins from the blood. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. If you don't have symptoms, you may not need treatment right away. This is called watchful waiting. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Multiple myeloma is a cancer that begins in plasma cells, a type of white blood cell. These cells are part of your immune system, which helps protect the body from germs and other harmful substances. In time, myeloma cells collect in the bone marrow and in the solid parts of bones. No one knows the exact causes of multiple myeloma, but it is more common in older people and African Americans. It can run in families. Common symptoms may include: Bone pain, often in the back or ribs Fractures (broken bones) Weakness or fatigue Weight loss Frequent infections and fevers Feeling very thirsty Frequent urination Doctors diagnose multiple myeloma using lab tests, imaging tests, and a bone marrow biopsy.  Your treatment depends on how advanced the disease is and whether you have symptoms.  If you have no symptoms, you may not need treatment right away. If you have symptoms, you may have chemotherapy, stem cell transplantation, radiation, or targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your bone marrow is the spongy tissue inside some of your bones, such as your hip and thigh bones. It contains immature cells, called stem cells. The stem cells can develop into the red blood cells that carry oxygen through your body, the white blood cells that fight infections, and the platelets that help with blood clotting. If you have a myelodysplastic syndrome, the stem cells do not mature into healthy blood cells. Many of them die in the bone marrow.  This means that you do not have enough healthy cells, which can lead to infection, anemia , or easy bleeding. Myelodysplastic syndromes often do not cause early symptoms and are sometimes found during a routine blood test.  If you have symptoms, they may include: Shortness of breath Weakness or feeling tired Skin that is paler than usual Easy bruising or bleeding Pinpoint spots under the skin caused by bleeding Fever or frequent infections Myelodysplastic syndromes are rare. People at higher risk are over 60, have had chemotherapy or radiation therapy, or have been exposed to certain chemicals.  Treatment options include transfusions, drug therapy, chemotherapy, and blood or bone marrow stem cell transplants. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is Pneumocystis jirovecii ? Pneumocystis jirovecii is a fungus that is common throughout the world. Many people have been exposed to it as children. Some people have the fungus in their lungs. If you are healthy, it usually will not make you sick. But it can make you sick if you have a weakened immune system , for example if you: Have HIV Have an autoimmune disease Have cancer Have a chronic (long-lasting) lung disease Had an organ or bone marrow transplant Take medicines which weaken your immune system, such as chemotherapy and steroids How does Pneumocystis jirovecii spread? Pneumocystis jirovecii can spread from person to person through the air. You can spread it to others even if it isn't making you sick. What is pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP)? The most common type of infection that Pneumocystis jirovecii causes is pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP). Pneumonia is an infection in one or both of the lungs. It causes the air sacs of the lungs to fill up with fluid or pus. What are the symptoms of pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP)? The symptoms of PCP can develop over several days or weeks. They may include: Fever Cough Trouble breathing Chest pain Chills Fatigue Contact your healthcare provider if you have symptoms that you think are related to PCP. Since PCP can be life-threatening, it's important to get early treatment. How is pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) diagnosed? To find out if you have PCP, your provider will take a sample of fluid or tissue from your lungs. You may cough up the sample (called sputum), have fluid collected during a bronchoalveolar lavage , or have tissue taken with a biopsy . They will send the sample to the lab to check for Pneumocystis . What are the treatments for pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP)? The treatment for PCP is with antibiotics , either by mouth or intravenously (by IV). You need to take them for about 3 weeks. If you have a severe case of PCP, you might need treatment in the hospital. Can pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) be prevented? There is no vaccine to prevent PCP. Some people who are at high risk of getting PCP may need to take antibiotics to prevent it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a form of arthritis that causes pain, swelling, stiffness and loss of function in your joints. It can affect any joint but is common in the wrist and fingers. More women than men get rheumatoid arthritis. It often starts in middle age and is most common in older people. You might have the disease for only a short time, or symptoms might come and go. The severe form can last a lifetime. Rheumatoid arthritis is different from osteoarthritis , the common arthritis that often comes with older age. RA can affect body parts besides joints, such as your eyes, mouth and lungs. RA is an autoimmune disease , which means the arthritis results from your immune system attacking your body's own tissues. No one knows what causes rheumatoid arthritis. Genes, environment, and hormones might contribute. Treatments include medicine, lifestyle changes, and surgery. These can slow or stop joint damage and reduce pain and swelling. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is Sjogren's syndrome? Sjogren's syndrome, also called Sjogren's disease, is a chronic (long-lasting) autoimmune disease . When you have an autoimmune disease, your immune system attacks healthy tissues and organs by mistake. In Sjogren's syndrome, your immune system attacks the glands that make moisture in the eyes, mouth, and other parts of the body. This causes a dry mouth and dry eyes . You may have dryness in other places that need moisture, such as your nose, throat, and skin. Sjogren's can also affect other parts of the body, including your joints, lungs, kidneys, blood vessels, digestive organs, and nerves. What causes Sjogren's syndrome? Normally, your immune system protects the body from infection and disease. But with Sjogren's syndrome and other autoimmune diseases, your immune system attacks healthy tissues and organs. Researchers don't know for sure what causes the immune system to do this. But they think that it is caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Studies have linked Sjogren's syndrome to gene changes in several genes. Some researchers also think that the disease may be triggered by something in the environment. For example, they think that one possible trigger could be a previous infection with a virus or bacteria . Who is more likely to develop Sjogren's syndrome? Most people with Sjogren's syndrome are women. You can get it at any age, but it is most common in people in their 40s and 50s. Sjogren's syndrome is more common in people who have other autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus . This is known as a secondary form of Sjogren's syndrome. People who don't have another autoimmune disease have a primary form of Sjogren's syndrome. What are the symptoms of Sjogren's syndrome? Sjogren's syndrome may have different effects on the body. Not everyone will have the same symptoms. Some people have cycles of mild and then severe symptoms. The two main symptoms are: Dry eyes. Your eyes may burn or itch or feel like they have sand in them. Sometimes your vision may be blurry, or you could be bothered by bright lights. Dry mouth. Your tongue and your throat may feel dry. You might have trouble swallowing , speaking , and tasting . Sjogren's syndrome can also affect other parts of the body, causing symptoms such as: Joint and muscle pain Dry skin Rashes on the skin of hands or feet Numbness or tingling in the hands or feet Vaginal dryness Dry cough that doesn't go away Fatigue that doesn't go away How is Sjogren's syndrome diagnosed? There is no single test for Sjogren's syndrome. To find out if you have it, your provider: Will ask about your medical history and symptoms. Will do a physical exam, which includes checking for signs of dry mouth and signs of related autoimmune diseases. May order tests, including: Eye tests to see if you produce a normal amount of tears and to find out if your eyes have been damaged by dryness. Salivary gland tests to measure how much saliva your mouth produces. They could include imaging tests and a biopsy . Blood tests. What are the treatments for Sjogren's syndrome? There is no cure for Sjogren's syndrome. Treatment focuses on relieving your symptoms. The treatments can be different for each person, depending on which parts of the body are affected. They may include: Eye drops (artificial tears) or ointments to relieve dryness in the eyes. Saliva substitutes. Prescription medicines that cause your salivary glands to make more saliva. A minor procedure that places small plugs the tear duct in the corners of the eyes. The plugs block your tears from draining so they stay in your eyes longer. Medicines to help with other symptoms caused by Sjogren's syndrome, such as medicines for pain and inflammation. Medicines that suppress (weaken) your immune system (for severe cases). You can also try to relieve some of your symptoms by sucking on sugar-free candy, drinking water often, increasing the humidity in your room, and not smoking. Because having a dry mouth can raise your risk of cavities, it's important to take good care of your teeth and see your dentist regularly.

Your spleen is an organ above your stomach and under your ribs on your left side. It is about as big as your fist. The spleen is part of your lymphatic system , which fights infection and keeps your body fluids in balance. It contains white blood cells that fight germs. Your spleen also helps control the amount of blood in your body, and destroys old and damaged cells. Certain diseases might cause your spleen to swell. You can also damage or rupture your spleen in an injury, especially if it is already swollen. If your spleen is too damaged, you might need surgery to remove it. You can live without a spleen. Other organs, such as your liver, will take over some of the spleen's work. Without a spleen, however, your body will lose some of its ability to fight infections.

Tetanus , diphtheria , and pertussis (whooping cough) are serious bacterial infections : Tetanus is an uncommon disease that requires immediate treatment in a hospital. It causes painful tightening of the muscles, usually all over the body. It can lead to "locking" of the jaw. Diphtheria usually affects the nose and throat. But it can also affect the skin and other body parts. Whooping cough can cause uncontrollable coughing fits. It may begin like a cold , but unlike a cold, the coughing can last for weeks or months. Vaccines can protect you from these diseases. In the U.S., there are three combination vaccines: DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis) prevents all three diseases. It is for babies and children under age 7. There are several different DTaP vaccines. Some of them also protect against other diseases. Tdap (tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis) also prevents all three diseases. It is for older children and adults. Td (tetanus and diphtheria) prevents those two diseases. It is for older children and adults. It is usually given as a booster dose every 10 years. You may also get it after 5 years if you get a severe or dirty wound or burn. Some people should not get these vaccines, including those who have had severe reactions to the shots before. Check with your health care provider first if you have seizures , a neurologic problem , or Guillain-Barre syndrome . People with minor illnesses such as a cold can get vaccinated. But those who are more ill may need wait until they feel better before getting some vaccines. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

The thymus is a small organ in your upper chest, under your breastbone. Before birth and during childhood, the thymus helps the body make a type of white blood cell. These cells help protect you from infections. Cancer of the thymus is rare. You are more likely to get it if you have other diseases such as myasthenia gravis, lupus or rheumatoid arthritis. Sometimes there are no symptoms.  Other times, thymus cancer can cause: A cough that doesn't go away Chest pain Trouble breathing Doctors use a physical exam, imaging tests, and a biopsy to diagnose thymus cancer. The most common treatment is surgery to remove the tumor. Other options include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and hormone therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What are tonsils? Tonsils are lumps of tissue at the back of the throat. There are two of them, one on each side. Along with the adenoids , tonsils are part of the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system clears away infection and keeps body fluids in balance.  Tonsils and adenoids work by trapping the germs coming in through the mouth and nose. What is tonsillitis? Tonsillitis is an inflammation (swelling) of the tonsils. Sometimes along with tonsillitis, the adenoids are also swollen. What causes tonsillitis? The cause of tonsillitis is usually a viral infection. Bacterial infections such as strep throat can also cause tonsillitis. Who is at risk for tonsillitis? Tonsillitis is most common in children over age two. Almost every child in the United States gets it at least once. Tonsillitis caused by bacteria is more common in kids ages 5-15. Tonsillitis caused by a virus is more common in younger children. Adults can get tonsillitis, but it is not very common. Is tonsillitis contagious? Although tonsillitis is not contagious, the viruses and bacteria that cause it are contagious. Frequent handwashing can help prevent spreading or catching the infections. What are the symptoms of tonsillitis? The symptoms of tonsillitis include: A sore throat , which may be severe Red, swollen tonsils Trouble swallowing A white or yellow coating on the tonsils Swollen glands in the neck Fever Bad breath When does my child need to see a health care provider for tonsillitis? You should call your health care provider if your child: Has a sore throat for more than two days Has trouble or pain when swallowing Feels very sick or very weak You should get emergency care right away if your child: Has trouble breathing Starts drooling Has a lot of trouble swallowing How is tonsillitis diagnosed? To diagnose tonsillitis, your child's health care provider will first ask you about your child's symptoms and medical history. The provider will look at your child's throat and neck, checking for things such as redness or white spots on the tonsils and swollen lymph nodes. Your child will probably also have one or more tests to check for strep throat, since it can cause tonsillitis and it requires treatment. It could be a rapid strep test, a throat culture, or both. For both tests, the provider uses a cotton swab to collect a sample of fluids from your child's tonsils and the back of the throat. With the rapid strep test, testing is done in the office, and you get the results within minutes. The throat culture is done in a lab, and it usually takes a few days to get the results. The throat culture is a more reliable test. So sometimes if the rapid strep test is negative (meaning that it does not show any strep bacteria), the provider will also do a throat culture just to make sure that your child does not have strep. What are the treatments for tonsillitis? Treatment for tonsillitis depends on the cause. If the cause is a virus, there is no medicine to treat it. If the cause is a bacterial infection, such as strep throat, your child will need to take antibiotics . It is important for your child to finish the antibiotics even if he or she feels better. If treatment stops too soon, some bacteria may survive and re-infect your child. No matter what is causing the tonsillitis, there are some things you can do to help your child feel better. Make sure that your child: Gets a lot of rest Drinks plenty of fluids Tries eating soft foods if it hurts to swallow Tries eating warm liquids or cold foods like popsicles to soothe the throat Isn't around cigarette smoke or do anything else that could irritate the throat Sleeps in a room with a humidifier Gargles with saltwater Sucks on a lozenge (but do not give them to children under four; they can choke on them) Takes an over-the-counter pain reliever such as acetaminophen. Children and teenagers should not take aspirin. In some cases, your child may need a tonsillectomy. What is a tonsillectomy and why might my child need one? A tonsillectomy is surgery to remove the tonsils. Your child might need it if he or she: Keeps getting tonsillitis Has bacterial tonsillitis that does not get better with antibiotics Has tonsils are too big, and are causing trouble breathing or swallowing Your child usually gets the surgery and goes home later that day. Very young children and people who have complications may need to stay in the hospital overnight. It can take a week or two before your child completely recovers from the surgery.

What are vaccines? Vaccines are injections (shots), liquids, pills, or nasal sprays that you take to teach your body's immune system to recognize and defend against harmful germs. For example, there are vaccines to protect against diseases caused by: Viruses , like the ones that cause the flu and COVID-19 Bacteria , including tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis What are the types of vaccines? There are several types of vaccines: Live-attenuated vaccines use a weakened form of the germ. Inactivated vaccines use a killed version of the germ. Subunit, recombinant, polysaccharide, and conjugate vaccines use only specific pieces of the germ, such as its protein, sugar, or casing. Toxoid vaccines that use a toxin (harmful product) made by the germ. mRNA vaccines use messenger RNA, which gives your cells instructions for how to make a protein (or piece of a protein) of the germ. Viral vector vaccines use genetic material, which gives your cells instructions for making a protein of the germ. These vaccines also contain a different, harmless virus that helps get the genetic material into your cells. These vaccines may work in different ways, but they all spark an immune response. The immune response is the way your body defends itself against substances it sees as foreign or harmful. These substances include germs that can cause disease. What happens in an immune response? There are different steps in the immune response: When a germ invades, your body sees it as foreign. Your immune system helps your body fight off the germ. Your immune system also remembers the germ. It will attack the germ if it ever invades again. This "memory" protects you against the disease that the germ causes. This type of protection is called immunity. What are immunization and vaccination? Immunization is the process of becoming protected against a disease. But it can also mean the same thing as vaccination, which is getting a vaccine to become protected against a disease. Why are vaccines important? Vaccines are important because they protect you against many diseases. These diseases can be very serious. So getting immunity from a vaccine is safer than getting immunity by being sick with the disease. For a few vaccines, getting vaccinated can actually give you a better immune response than getting the disease would. But vaccines don't just protect you. They also protect the people around you through community immunity. What is community immunity? Community immunity, or herd immunity, is the idea that vaccines can help keep communities healthy. Normally, germs can travel quickly through a community and make a lot of people sick. If enough people get sick, it can lead to an outbreak. But when enough people are vaccinated against a certain disease, it's harder for that disease to spread to others. This type of protection means that the entire community is less likely to get the disease. Community immunity is especially important for people who can't get certain vaccines. For example, they may not be able to get a vaccine because they have weakened immune systems. Others may be allergic to certain vaccine ingredients. And newborn babies are too young to get some vaccines. Community immunity can help to protect them all. Are vaccines safe? Vaccines are safe . They must go through extensive safety testing and evaluation before they are approved in the United States. What is a vaccine schedule? A vaccine, or immunization, schedule lists which vaccines are recommended for different groups of people. It includes who should get the vaccines, how many doses they need, and when they should get them. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes the vaccine schedule. It's important for both children and adults to get their vaccines according to the schedule. Following the schedule allows them to get protection from the diseases at exactly the right time.

What are viruses? Viruses are very tiny germs. They are made of genetic material (either DNA or RNA) inside of a protein coating. There are a huge number of viruses on earth. Only a small number of them can infect humans. Those viruses can infect our cells, which may cause disease. Some of the diseases that viruses can cause include the common cold , the flu , COVID-19 , and HIV . How are viruses spread? Viruses can be spread in different ways: Through droplets and particles that are breathed out by someone who has the infection. You might breathe in the droplets or particles, or they could land on your mouth, nose, or eyes. By touching surfaces or objects that have the virus on them and then touching your mouth, nose, or eyes. From the pregnant parent to the baby during pregnancy . Through contaminated food or water . By being bitten by an infected insect or animal. Through sexual contact (usually vaginal, anal and oral sex) with someone who has the infection. How do viruses cause disease? Viruses are like hijackers. They invade living, normal cells. They then use those cells to multiply (make copies of themselves). This process is also called replication. The process can kill, damage, or change the infected cells. Sometimes this can make you sick. The symptoms can range from mild to very severe. Other times, your immune system may be able to fight it off and you may not have any symptoms. Each different virus usually only infects one type of cell in your body. For example, hepatitis viruses affect the cells in the liver. HIV infects a certain type of immune system cell. What are the treatments for viral infections? For most viral infections, treatments can only help with symptoms while you wait for your immune system to fight off the virus. There are antiviral medicines to treat some viral infections. Antibiotics do not work for viral infections. Can viral infections be prevented? Vaccines can help prevent you from getting many viral diseases. You may be able to prevent some viral infections by: Proper hand washing . Paying attention to food safety . Cleaning surfaces that may be infected with germs. Avoiding contact with wild animals. Preventing insect bites by using insect repellent when you go outdoors. If you travel to an area that has a high risk of diseases from insect bites, also wear long pants, shirts, and socks. Practicing safe sex (using a condom every time you have anal, vaginal, or oral sex). Avoiding close contact with people who are sick.

The bladder is a hollow organ in your lower abdomen that stores urine. Bladder cancer occurs in the lining of the bladder. It is the sixth most common type of cancer in the United States. Symptoms include: Blood in your urine A frequent urge to urinate Pain when you urinate Low back pain Risk factors for developing bladder cancer include smoking and exposure to certain chemicals in the workplace.  People with a family history of bladder cancer or who are older, white, or male have a higher risk. Treatments for bladder cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biologic therapy. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The bladder is a hollow organ in your lower abdomen that stores urine. Many conditions can affect your bladder. Some common ones are: Cystitis - inflammation of the bladder, often from an infection Urinary incontinence - loss of bladder control Overactive bladder - a condition in which the bladder squeezes urine out at the wrong time Interstitial cystitis - a chronic problem that causes bladder pain and frequent, urgent urination Bladder cancer Doctors diagnose bladder diseases using different tests. These include urine tests , x-rays, and an examination of the bladder wall with a scope called a cystoscope. Treatment depends on the cause of the problem. It may include medicines and, in severe cases, surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

You have two kidneys, each about the size of your fist.  Their main job is to filter your blood. They remove wastes and extra water, which become urine. They also keep the body's chemicals balanced, help control blood pressure, and make hormones. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) means that your kidneys are damaged and can't filter blood as they should. This damage can cause wastes to build up in your body. It can also cause other problems that can harm your health. Diabetes and high blood pressure are the most common causes of CKD. The kidney damage occurs slowly over many years. Many people don't have any symptoms until their kidney disease is very advanced. Blood and urine tests are the only way to know if you have kidney disease. Treatments cannot cure kidney disease, but they may slow kidney disease. They include medicines to lower blood pressure , control blood sugar , and lower cholesterol . CKD may still get worse over time. Sometimes it can lead to kidney failure . If your kidneys fail, you will need dialysis or a kidney transplantation . You can take steps to keep your kidneys healthier longer: Choose foods with less salt (sodium) Control your blood pressure ; your health care provider can tell you what your blood pressure should be Keep your blood sugar in the target range, if you have diabetes Limit the amount of alcohol you drink Choose foods that are healthy for your heart: fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy foods Lose weight if you are overweight Be physically active Don't smoke NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Diabetes insipidus (DI) causes frequent urination. You become extremely thirsty, so you drink. Then you urinate. This cycle can keep you from sleeping or even make you wet the bed. Your body produces lots of urine that is almost all water. DI is different from diabetes mellitus (DM), which involves insulin problems and high blood sugar. The symptoms can be similar. However, DI is related to how your kidneys handle fluids. It's much less common than DM. Urine and blood tests can show which one you have. Usually, DI is caused by a problem with your pituitary gland or your kidneys. Treatment depends on the cause of the problem.  Medicines can often help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

If you have diabetes , your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Over time, this can damage your kidneys. Your kidneys clean your blood. If they are damaged, waste and fluids build up in your blood instead of leaving your body. Kidney damage from diabetes is called diabetic nephropathy. It begins long before you have symptoms. People with diabetes should get regular screenings for kidney disease. Tests include a urine test to detect protein in your urine and a blood test to show how well your kidneys are working. If the damage continues, your kidneys could fail. In fact, diabetes is the most common cause of kidney failure in the United States. People with kidney failure need either dialysis or a kidney transplant . You can slow down kidney damage or keep it from getting worse. Controlling your blood sugar and blood pressure, taking your medicines and not eating too much protein can help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

When your kidneys are healthy, they clean your blood. They also make hormones that keep 
your bones strong and your blood healthy. When your kidneys fail, you need treatment to 
replace the work your kidneys used to do. Unless you have a kidney transplant , you will need a treatment called dialysis. There are two main types of dialysis. Both types filter your blood to rid your body of harmful wastes, extra salt, and water.: Hemodialysis uses a machine. It is sometimes called an artificial kidney. You usually go to a special clinic for treatments several times a week. Peritoneal dialysis uses the lining of your abdomen, called the peritoneal membrane, to filter your blood. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Interstitial cystitis (IC) is a condition that causes discomfort or pain in the bladder and a need to urinate frequently and urgently. It is far more common in women than in men. The symptoms vary from person to person. Some people may have pain without urgency or frequency. Others have urgency and frequency without pain. Women's symptoms often get worse during their periods. They may also have pain with sexual intercourse. The cause of IC isn't known. There is no one test to tell if you have it.  Doctors often run tests to rule out other possible causes of symptoms. There is no cure for IC, but treatments can help most people feel better. They include: Distending, or inflating, the bladder Bathing the inside of the bladder with a drug solution Oral medicines Electrical nerve stimulation Physical therapy Lifestyle changes Bladder training In rare cases, surgery NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

You have two kidneys. They are fist-sized organs on either side of your backbone above your waist. The tubes inside filter and clean your blood, taking out waste products and making urine.  Kidney cancer forms in the lining of tiny tubes inside your kidneys. Kidney cancer becomes more likely as you age. Risk factors include smoking, having certain genetic conditions, and misusing pain medicines for a long time. You may have no symptoms at first. They may appear as the cancer grows. See your health care provider if you notice: Blood in your urine A lump in your abdomen Weight loss for no reason Pain in your side that does not go away Loss of appetite Tests to diagnose kidney cancer include blood, urine, and imaging tests. You may also have a biopsy. Treatment depends on your age, your overall health and how advanced the cancer is. It might include surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation, biologic, or targeted therapies.  Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A cyst is a fluid-filled sac. You may get simple kidney cysts as you age; they are usually harmless. There are also some diseases which cause kidney cysts. One type is polycystic kidney disease (PKD). It runs in families. In PKD, many cysts grow in the kidneys. This can enlarge the kidneys and make them work poorly. About half of people with the most common type of PKD end up with kidney failure . PKD also causes cysts in other parts of the body, such as the liver. Often, there are no symptoms at first. Later, symptoms include: Pain in the back and lower sides Headaches Blood in the urine Doctors diagnose PKD with imaging tests and family history. There is no cure. Treatments can help with symptoms and complications. They include medicines and lifestyle changes, and if there is kidney failure, dialysis or kidney transplants . Acquired cystic kidney disease (ACKD) happens in people who have chronic kidney disease , especially if they are on dialysis. Unlike PKD, the kidneys are normal sized, and cysts do not form in other parts of the body. ACKD often has no symptoms. Usually, the cysts are harmless and do not need treatment. If they do cause complications, treatments include medicines, draining the cysts, or surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

You have two kidneys, each about the size of your fist. They are near the middle of your back, just below the rib cage. Inside each kidney there are about a million tiny structures called nephrons. They filter your blood. They remove wastes and extra water, which become urine.  The urine flows through tubes called ureters. It goes to your bladder, which stores the urine until you go to the bathroom. Most kidney diseases attack the nephrons. This damage may leave kidneys unable to remove wastes. Causes can include genetic problems, injuries, or medicines. You have a higher risk of kidney disease if you have diabetes , high blood pressure , or a close family member with kidney disease. Chronic kidney disease damages the nephrons slowly over several years. Other kidney problems include: Cancer Cysts Stones Infections Your doctor can do blood and urine tests to check if you have kidney disease. If your kidneys fail , you will need dialysis or a kidney transplant . NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Healthy kidneys clean your blood by removing excess fluid, minerals, and wastes. They also make hormones that keep your bones strong and your blood healthy. But if the kidneys are damaged, they don't work properly. Harmful wastes can build up in your body. Your blood pressure may rise. Your body may retain excess fluid and not make enough red blood cells. This is called kidney failure. If your kidneys fail, you need treatment to replace the work they normally do. The treatment options are dialysis or a kidney transplant . Each treatment has benefits and drawbacks. No matter which treatment you choose, you'll need to make some changes in your life, including how you eat and plan your activities. But with the help of health care providers, family, and friends, most people with kidney failure can lead full and active lives. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A kidney stone is a solid piece of material that forms in the kidney from substances in the urine. It may be as small as a grain of sand or as large as a pearl. Most kidney stones pass out of the body without help from a doctor. But sometimes a stone will not go away. It may get stuck in the urinary tract, block the flow of urine and cause great pain. The following may be signs of kidney stones that need a doctor's help: Extreme pain in your back or side that will not go away Blood in your urine Fever and chills Vomiting Urine that smells bad or looks cloudy A burning feeling when you urinate Your doctor will diagnose a kidney stone with urine, blood, and imaging tests . If you have a stone that won't pass on its own, you may need treatment. It can be done with shock waves; with a scope inserted through the tube that carries urine out of the body, called the urethra; or with surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

You have two kidneys. They are fist-sized organs on either side of your backbone above your waist. Your kidneys filter and clean your blood, taking out waste products and making urine. Kidney tests check to see how well your kidneys are working. They include blood, urine , and imaging tests. Early kidney disease usually does not have signs or symptoms. Testing is the only way to know how your kidneys are doing. It is important for you to get checked for kidney disease if you have the key risk factors - diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, or a family history of kidney failure. Specific kidney tests include: Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) - one of the most common blood tests to check for chronic kidney disease . It tells how well your kidneys are filtering. Creatinine blood and urine tests - check the levels of creatinine, a waste product that your kidneys remove from your blood Albumin urine test - checks for albumin, a protein that can pass into the urine if the kidneys are damaged Imaging tests, such as an ultrasound - provide pictures of the kidneys. The pictures help the health care provider see the size and shape of the kidneys, and check for anything unusual. Kidney biopsy - a procedure that involves taking a small piece of kidney tissue for examination with a microscope. It checks for the cause of kidney disease and how damaged your kidneys are. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A kidney transplant is an operation that places a healthy kidney in your body. The transplanted kidney takes over the work of the two kidneys that failed , so you no longer need dialysis . During a transplant, the surgeon places the new kidney in your lower abdomen and connects the artery and vein of the new kidney to your artery and vein. Often, the new kidney will start making urine as soon as your blood starts flowing through it. But sometimes it takes a few weeks to start working. Many transplanted kidneys come from donors who have died. Some come from a living family member. The wait for a new kidney can be long. If you have a transplant, you must take drugs for the rest of your life, to keep your body from rejecting the new kidney. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

An ostomy is surgery to create an opening (stoma) from an area inside the body to the outside. It treats certain diseases of the digestive or urinary systems. It can be permanent, when an organ must be removed.  It can be temporary, when the organ needs time to heal.  The organ could be the small intestine, colon, rectum, or bladder. With an ostomy, there must be a new way for wastes to leave the body. There are many different types of ostomy. Some examples are: Ileostomy - the bottom of the small intestine (ileum) is attached to the stoma. This bypasses the colon, rectum and anus. Colostomy - the colon is attached to the stoma. This bypasses the rectum and the anus. Urostomy - the tubes that carry urine to the bladder are attached to the stoma. This bypasses the bladder. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Overactive bladder is a condition in which the bladder squeezes urine out at the wrong time. You may have overactive bladder if you have two or more of these symptoms: You urinate eight or more times a day or two or more times at night You have the sudden, strong need to urinate immediately You leak urine after a sudden, strong urge to urinate You also may have incontinence , a loss of bladder control. Nerve problems, too much fluid, or too much caffeine can cause it. Often the cause is unknown. Your doctor may prescribe a medicine that can calm muscles and nerves. The medicine may come as a pill, a liquid, or a patch. The medicines can cause your eyes to become dry. They can also cause dry mouth and constipation.  To deal with these effects, use eye drops to keep your eyes moist, chew sugarless gum or suck on sugarless hard candy if dry mouth bothers you, and take small sips of water throughout the day. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A urinalysis is a test of your urine . It is often done to check for a urinary tract infections , kidney problems , or diabetes . You may also have one during a checkup, if you are admitted to the hospital, before you have surgery, or if you are pregnant.  It can also monitor some medical conditions and treatments. A urinalysis involves checking the urine for: Its color Its appearance (whether it is clear or cloudy) Any odor The pH level (acidity) Whether there are substances that are not normally in urine, such as blood, too much protein, glucose, ketones, and bilirubin Whether there are cells, crystals, and casts (tube-shaped proteins) Whether it contains bacteria or other germs

What is urinary incontinence (UI)? Urinary incontinence (UI) is the loss of bladder control, or being unable to control urination. It is a common condition. It can range from being a minor problem to something that greatly affects your daily life.  In any case, it can get better with proper treatment. What are the types of urinary incontinence (UI)? There are several different types of UI. Each type has different symptoms and causes: Stress incontinence happens when stress or pressure on your bladder causes you to leak urine.  This could be due to coughing, sneezing, laughing, lifting something heavy, or physical activity. Causes include weak pelvic floor muscles and the bladder being out of its normal position. Urge, or urgency, incontinence happens when you have a strong urge (need) to urinate, and some urine leaks out before you can make it to the toilet. It is often related to an overactive bladder . Urge incontinence is most common in older people. It can sometimes be a sign of a urinary tract infection (UTI) . It can also happen in some neurological conditions , such as multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injuries . Overflow incontinence happens when your bladder doesn't empty all the way. This causes too much urine to stay in your bladder. Your bladder gets too full, and you leak urine. This form of UI is most common in men. Some of the causes include tumors, kidney stones , diabetes , and certain medicines. Functional incontinence happens when a physical or mental disability , trouble speaking , or some other problem keeps you from getting to the toilet in time. For example, someone with arthritis may have trouble unbuttoning his or her pants, or a person with Alzheimer's disease may not realize they need to plan to use the toilet. Mixed incontinence means that you have more than one type of incontinence. It's usually a combination of stress and urge incontinence. Transient incontinence is urine leakage that is caused by a temporary (transient) situation such as an infection or new medicine. Once the cause is removed, the incontinence goes away. Bedwetting refers to urine leakage during sleep. This is most common in children, but adults can also have it. Bedwetting is normal for many children. It is more common in boys. Bedwetting is often not considered a health problem, especially when it runs in the family. But if it still happens often at age 5 and older, it may be because of a bladder control problem. This problem could be caused by slow physical development, an illness, making too much urine at night, or another problem. Sometimes there is more than one cause. In adults, the causes include some medicines, caffeine , and alcohol . It can also be caused by certain health problems, such as diabetes insipidus , a urinary tract infection (UTI), kidney stones, enlarged prostate (BPH), and sleep apnea . Who is at risk for urinary incontinence (UI)? In adults, you are at higher risk of developing UI if you: Are female, especially after going through pregnancy, childbirth, and/or menopause Are older. As you age, your urinary tract muscles weaken, making it harder to hold in urine. Are a man with prostate problems Have certain health problems, such as diabetes, obesity , or long-lasting constipation Are a smoker Have a birth defect that affects the structure of your urinary tract In children, bedwetting is more common in younger children, boys, and those whose parents wet the bed when they were children. How is urinary incontinence (UI) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. Your provider may ask you to keep a bladder diary for a few days before your appointment. The bladder diary includes how much and when you drink liquids, when and how much you urinate, and whether you leak urine. A physical exam, which can include a rectal exam. Women may also get a pelvic exam. Urine and/or blood tests Bladder function tests Imaging tests What are the treatments for urinary incontinence (UI)? Treatment depends on the type and cause of your UI. You may need a combination of treatments. Your provider may first suggest self-care treatments, including: Lifestyle changes to reduce leaks: Drinking the right amount of liquid at the right time Being physically active Staying at a healthy weigh Avoiding constipation Not smoking Bladder training. This involves urinating according to a schedule. Your provider makes a schedule from you, based on information from your bladder diary. After you adjust to the schedule, you gradually wait a little longer between trips to the bathroom. This can help stretch your bladder so it can hold more urine. Doing exercises to strengthen your pelvic floor muscles . Strong pelvic floor muscles hold in urine better than weak muscles. The strengthening exercises are called Kegel exercises. They involve tightening and relaxing the muscles that control urine flow. If these treatments do not work, your provider may suggest other options such as: Medicines , which can be used to Relax the bladder muscles, to help prevent bladder spasms Block nerve signals that cause urinary frequency and urgency In men, shrink the prostate and improve urine flow Medical devices , including A catheter, which is a tube to carry urine out of the body. You might use one a few times a day or all the time. For women, a ring or a tampon-like device inserted into the vagina. The devices pushes up against your urethra to help decrease leaks. Bulking agents , which are injected into the bladder neck and urethra tissues to thicken them. This helps close your bladder opening so you have less leaking. Electrical nerve stimulation , which involves changing your bladder's reflexes using pulses of electricity Surgery to support the bladder in its normal position. This may be done with a sling that is attached to the pubic bone. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

The urinary system is the body's drainage system for removing wastes and extra water. It includes two kidneys, two ureters, a bladder, and a urethra. Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are the second most common type of infection in the body. You may have a UTI if you notice: Pain or burning when you urinate Fever, tiredness, or shakiness An urge to urinate often Pressure in your lower belly Urine that smells bad or looks cloudy or reddish Pain in your back or side below the ribs People of any age or sex can get UTIs. But about four times as many women get UTIs as men. You're also at higher risk if you have diabetes, need a tube to drain your bladder, or have a spinal cord injury. If you think you have a UTI it is important to see your doctor. Your doctor can tell if you have a UTI with a urine test .  Treatment is with antibiotics. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your kidneys make urine by filtering wastes and extra water from your blood. The waste is called urea. Your blood carries it to the kidneys. From the kidneys, urine travels down two thin tubes called ureters to the bladder. The bladder stores urine until you are ready to urinate. It swells into a round shape when it is full and gets smaller when empty. If your urinary system is healthy, your bladder can hold up to 16 ounces (2 cups) of urine comfortably for 2 to 5 hours. You may have problems with urination if you have: Kidney failure Urinary tract infections An enlarged prostate Bladder control problems like incontinence , overactive bladder , or interstitial cystitis A blockage that prevents you from emptying your bladder Some conditions may also cause you to have blood or protein in your urine. If you have a urinary problem, see your health care provider. Urinalysis and other urine tests can help to diagnose the problem. Treatment depends on the cause. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Wilms tumor is a rare type of kidney cancer. It causes a tumor on one or both kidneys. It usually affects children, but can happen in adults. Having certain genetic conditions or birth defects can increase the risk of getting it. Children that are at risk should be screened for Wilms tumor every three months until they turn eight. Symptoms include a lump in the abdomen, blood in the urine, and a fever for no reason. Tests that examine the kidney and blood are used to find the tumor. Doctors usually diagnose and remove the tumor in surgery. Other treatments include chemotherapy and radiation and biologic therapies. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Bronchitis is an inflammation of the bronchial tubes, the airways that carry air to your lungs. It causes a cough that often brings up mucus. It can also cause shortness of breath, wheezing, a low fever, and chest tightness. There are two main types of bronchitis: acute and chronic . Most cases of acute bronchitis get better within several days. But your cough can last for several weeks after the infection is gone. The same viruses that cause colds and the flu often cause acute bronchitis. These viruses spread through the air when people cough, or though physical contact (for example, on unwashed hands). Being exposed to tobacco smoke, air pollution, dusts, vapors, and fumes can also cause acute bronchitis. Less often, bacteria can also cause acute bronchitis. To diagnose acute bronchitis, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and listen to your breathing. You may also have other tests. Treatments include rest, fluids, and aspirin (for adults) or acetaminophen to treat fever. A humidifier or steam can also help. You may need inhaled medicine to open your airways if you are wheezing. Antibiotics won't help if the cause is viral. You may get antibiotics if the cause is bacterial. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Asbestos is the name of a group of minerals with long, thin fibers. It was once used widely as insulation. It also occurs in the environment. Asbestos fibers are so small you can't see them. If you disturb asbestos, the fibers can float in the air. This makes them easy to inhale, and some may become lodged in the lungs. If you breathe in high levels of asbestos over a long period of time, the fibers can build up in the lungs.  This causes scarring and inflammation, and can affect breathing. Eventually it can lead to diseases such as: Asbestosis, or scarring of the lungs that makes it hard to breathe Mesothelioma , a rare cancer that affects the lining of the lungs or abdomen Lung cancer Lung diseases associated with asbestos usually develop over many years. People who become ill from asbestos are usually exposed on the job over long periods of time. Smoking cigarettes increases the risk. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

What is asthma? Asthma is a chronic (long-term) lung disease. It affects your airways, the tubes that carry air in and out of your lungs. When you have asthma, your airways can become inflamed and narrowed. This can cause wheezing, coughing , and tightness in your chest. When these symptoms get worse than usual, it is called an asthma attack or flare-up. What causes asthma? The exact cause of asthma is unknown. Genetics and your environment likely play a role in who gets asthma. An asthma attack can happen when you are exposed to an asthma trigger. An asthma trigger is something that can set off or worsen your asthma symptoms. Different triggers can cause different types of asthma: Allergic asthma is caused by allergens. Allergens are substances that cause an allergic reaction. They can include Dust mites Mold Pets Pollen from grass, trees, and weeds Waste from pests such as cockroaches and mice Nonallergic asthma is caused by triggers that are not allergens, such as Breathing in cold air Certain medicines Household chemicals Infections such as colds and the flu Outdoor air pollution Tobacco smoke Occupational asthma is caused by breathing in chemicals or industrial dusts at work Exercise-induced asthma happens during physical exercise, especially when the air is dry Asthma triggers may be different for each person and can change over time. Who is at risk for asthma? Asthma affects people of all ages, but it often starts during childhood. Certain factors can raise your risk of having asthma: Being exposed to secondhand smoke when your mother is pregnant with you or when you are a small child Being exposed to certain substances at work , such as chemical irritants or industrial dusts Genetics and family history. You are more likely to have asthma if one of your parents has it, especially if it's your mother. Race or ethnicity. Black and African Americans and Puerto Ricans are at higher risk of asthma than people of other races or ethnicities. Having other diseases or conditions such as obesity and allergies Often having viral respiratory infections as a young child Sex. In children, asthma is more common in boys. In teens and adults, it is more common in women. What are the symptoms of asthma? The symptoms of asthma include: Chest tightness Coughing, especially at night or early morning Shortness of breath Wheezing, which causes a whistling sound when you breathe out These symptoms can range from mild to severe. You may have them every day or only once in a while. When you are having an asthma attack, your symptoms get much worse. The attacks may come on gradually or suddenly. Sometimes they can be life-threatening. They are more common in people who have severe asthma. If you are having asthma attacks, you may need a change in your treatment. How is asthma diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose asthma: Physical exam Medical history Lung function tests , including spirometry, to test how well your lungs work Tests to measure how your airways react to specific exposures. During this test, you inhale different concentrations of allergens or medicines that may tighten the muscles in your airways. Spirometry is done before and after the test. Peak expiratory flow (PEF) tests to measure how fast you can blow air out using maximum effort Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) tests to measure levels of nitric oxide in your breath when you breathe out. High levels of nitric oxide may mean that your lungs are inflamed. Allergy skin or blood tests, if you have a history of allergies. These tests check which allergens cause a reaction from your immune system. What are the treatments for asthma? If you have asthma, you will work with your health care provider to create a treatment plan. The plan will include ways to manage your asthma symptoms and prevent asthma attacks. It will include: Strategies to avoid triggers. For example, if tobacco smoke is a trigger for you, you should not smoke or allow other people to smoke in your home or car. Short-term relief medicines, also called quick-relief medicines. They help prevent symptoms or relieve symptoms during an asthma attack. They include an inhaler to carry with you all the time. It may also include other types of medicines which work quickly to help open your airways. Control medicines. You take them every day to help prevent symptoms. They work by reducing airway inflammation and preventing narrowing of the airways. If you have a severe attack and the short-term relief medicines do not work, you will need emergency care. Your provider may adjust your treatment until asthma symptoms are controlled. Sometimes asthma is severe and cannot be controlled with other treatments. If you are an adult with uncontrolled asthma, in some cases your provider might suggest bronchial thermoplasty. This is a procedure that uses heat to shrink the smooth muscle in the lungs. Shrinking the muscle reduces your airway's ability to tighten and allows you to breathe more easily. The procedure has some risks, so it's important to discuss them with your provider.

What is asthma? Asthma is a chronic (long-term) lung disease. It affects your airways, the tubes that carry air in and out of your lungs. When you have asthma, your airways can become inflamed and narrowed. This can cause wheezing, coughing , and tightness in your chest. When these symptoms get worse than usual, it is called an asthma attack or flare-up. How does asthma affect children? Asthma often starts during childhood, usually before age 5. Many children have asthma - it is the most common chronic disease of childhood. It can cause children to miss school and end up in the hospital. But treatments can help manage asthma. What causes asthma in children? The exact cause of asthma is unknown. Genetics and environment likely play a role in which children get asthma. An asthma attack can happen when your child is exposed to an asthma trigger. An asthma trigger is something that can set off or worsen asthma symptoms. Different triggers can cause different types of asthma: Allergic asthma is caused by allergens. Allergens are substances that cause an allergic reaction. They can include Dust mites Mold Pets Pollen from grass, trees, and weeds Waste from pests such as cockroaches and mice Nonallergic asthma is caused by triggers that are not allergens, such as Breathing in cold air Certain medicines Household chemicals Infections such as colds and the flu Outdoor air pollution Tobacco smoke Exercise-induced asthma happens during physical exercise, especially when the air is dry Asthma triggers may be different for each child and can change over time. Which children are at risk for asthma? Certain factors raise the risk of asthma in children: Being exposed to secondhand smoke when their mother is pregnant with them or when they are small children Genetics and family history. Children are more likely to have asthma if one of their parents has it, especially if it's the mother. Race or ethnicity. Black and African Americans and Puerto Ricans are at higher risk of asthma than people of other races or ethnicities. Having other diseases or conditions such as obesity and allergies Often having viral respiratory infections as young children Sex. In children, asthma is more common in boys. In teens, it is more common in girls. What are the symptoms of asthma in children? The symptoms of asthma in children include: Chest tightness Coughing, especially at night or early morning Breathing problems , such as shortness of breath, rapid breathing, or gasping for air Feeling tired Dark circles under the eyes Being irritable Wheezing, which causes a whistling sound when they breathe out Trouble eating or sucking (in infants) These symptoms can range from mild to severe. They may happen often or only once in a while. When children have an asthma attack, their symptoms get much worse. The attacks may come on gradually or suddenly. Sometimes they can be life-threatening. Warning signs of a severe attack include severe coughing, serious breathing problems, and turning very pale or blue in the face, lips and/or fingernails. If your child has those symptoms, get medical help right away. How is asthma in children diagnosed? It can be hard to diagnose asthma in children, especially if they are young. Asthma has similar symptoms as other childhood conditions. And some children may not have asthma symptoms very often, so it may seem like they are having respiratory infections instead. Your child's health care provider may use many tools to diagnose asthma: Physical exam Medical history Chest x-ray Lung function tests , including spirometry, to test how well the lungs work. Younger children are usually not able to do these tests. Allergy skin or blood tests, if you have a history of allergies. These tests check which allergens cause a reaction from your immune system. If you have a young child who cannot do lung function tests, the provider may suggest doing a trial of asthma medicines. The trial involves giving your child the medicines for several weeks to see whether the symptoms get better. What are the treatments for asthma in children? If your child has asthma, you will work with their health care provider to create a treatment plan. The plan will include ways to manage your child's asthma symptoms and prevent asthma attacks, such as: Strategies to avoid triggers. For example, if tobacco smoke is a trigger for your child, you should not allow anyone to smoke in your home or car. Short-term relief medicines, also called quick-relief medicines. They help prevent symptoms or relieve symptoms during an asthma attack. They include an inhaler to have for your child at all times. It may also include other types of medicines which work quickly to help open your child's airways. Control medicines. They work by reducing airway inflammation and preventing narrowing of the airways. Not all children will take control medicines. Whether or not your child needs them depends on how severe the asthma is and how often your child has symptoms. If your child has a severe attack and the short-term relief medicines do not work, get medical help right away. Your child's provider may adjust the treatment until the asthma symptoms are controlled.

When you're short of breath, it's hard or uncomfortable for you to take in the oxygen your body needs. You may feel as if you're not getting enough air. Sometimes you can have mild breathing problems because of a stuffy nose or intense exercise. But shortness of breath can also be a sign of a serious disease. Many conditions can make you feel short of breath: Lung conditions such as asthma , emphysema , or pneumonia Problems with your trachea or bronchi , which are part of your airway system Heart disease can make you feel breathless if your heart cannot pump enough blood to supply oxygen to your body Anxiety and panic attacks Allergies If you often have trouble breathing, it is important to find out the cause.

When you breathe in, the air travels down through your trachea (windpipe). It then goes through two tubes to your lungs. These tubes are your bronchi. Bronchial disorders can make it hard for you to breathe. The most common problem with the bronchi is bronchitis, an inflammation of the tubes. It can be acute or chronic . Other problems include: Bronchiectasis - a condition in which damage to the airways causes them to widen and become flabby and scarred Exercise-induced bronchospasm - a breathing problem that happens when your airways shrink while you are exercising Bronchiolitis - an inflammation of the small airways that branch off from the bronchi Bronchopulmonary dysplasia - a chronic lung condition in infants, most often premature infants

Food or small objects can cause choking if they get caught in your throat and block your airway. This keeps oxygen from getting to your lungs and brain. If your brain goes without oxygen for more than four minutes, you could have brain damage or die. Young children are at an especially high risk of choking. They can choke on foods like hot dogs, nuts and grapes, and on small objects like toy pieces and coins. Keep hazards out of their reach and supervise them when they eat. When someone is choking, quick action can be lifesaving. Learn how to do back blows, the Heimlich maneuver (abdominal thrusts), and CPR .

What is chronic bronchitis? Chronic bronchitis is a type of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). COPD is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. The other main type of COPD is emphysema . Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. Chronic bronchitis is inflammation (swelling) and irritation of the bronchial tubes. These tubes are the airways that carry air to and from the air sacs in your lungs. The irritation of the tubes causes mucus to build up. This mucus and the swelling of the tubes make it harder for your lungs to move oxygen in and carbon dioxide out of your body. What causes chronic bronchitis? The cause of chronic bronchitis is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause chronic bronchitis, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to chronic bronchitis. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing chronic bronchitis. Who is at risk for chronic bronchitis? The risk factors for chronic bronchitis include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have chronic bronchitis smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace. Age. Most people who have chronic bronchitis are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get chronic bronchitis are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. What are the symptoms of chronic bronchitis? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or a cough that produces a lot mucus Wheezing A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity Tightness in your chest Some people with chronic bronchitis get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, chronic bronchitis can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is chronic bronchitis diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Various tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests What are the treatments for chronic bronchitis? There is no cure for chronic bronchitis. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat chronic bronchitis. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with chronic bronchitis are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases. Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe chronic bronchitis and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling A lung transplant , as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines If you have chronic bronchitis, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can chronic bronchitis be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of chronic bronchitis, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A collapsed lung happens when air enters the pleural space, the area between the lung and the chest wall. If it is a total collapse, it is called pneumothorax. If only part of the lung is affected, it is called atelectasis. Causes of a collapsed lung include: Lung diseases such as pneumonia or lung cancer Being on a breathing machine Surgery on the chest or abdomen A blocked airway If only a small area of the lung is affected, you may not have symptoms. If a large area is affected, you may feel short of breath and have a rapid heart rate. A chest x-ray can tell if you have it. Treatment depends on the underlying cause. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. Normally, the airways and air sacs in your lungs are elastic or stretchy. When you breathe in, the airways bring air to the air sacs. The air sacs fill up with air, like a small balloon. When you breathe out, the air sacs deflate, and the air goes out. If you have COPD, less air flows in and out of your airways because of one or more problems: The airways and air sacs in your lungs become less elastic The walls between many of the air sacs are destroyed The walls of the airways become thick and inflamed The airways make more mucus than usual and can become clogged What are the types of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? COPD includes two main types: Emphysema affects the air sacs in your lungs, as well as the walls between them. They become damaged and are less elastic. Chronic bronchitis , in which the lining of your airways is constantly irritated and inflamed. This causes the lining to swell and make mucus. Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. What causes COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? The cause of COPD is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause COPD, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to COPD. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing COPD. Who is at risk for COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? The risk factors for COPD include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have COPD smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace Age. Most people who have COPD are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get COPD are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. Asthma. People who have asthma have more risk of developing COPD than people who don't have asthma. But most people with asthma will not get COPD. What are the symptoms of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or a cough that produces a lot mucus Wheezing A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity Tightness in your chest Some people with COPD get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, COPD can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Various tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests Your doctor will diagnose COPD based on your signs and symptoms, your medical and family histories, and test results. What are the treatments for COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? There is no cure for COPD. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat COPD. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with COPD are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe COPD and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling Surgery , usually as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines: For COPD that is mainly related to emphysema, there are surgeries that Remove damaged lung tissue Remove large air spaces (bullae) that can form when air sacs are destroyed. The bullae can interfere with breathing. For severe COPD, some people may need lung transplant If you have COPD, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of COPD, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Coughing is a reflex that keeps your throat and airways clear.  Although it can be annoying, coughing helps your body heal or protect itself. Coughs can be either acute or chronic.  Acute coughs begin suddenly and usually last no more than 2 to 3 weeks.  Acute coughs are the kind you most often get with a cold , flu , or acute bronchitis .  Chronic coughs last longer than 2 to 3 weeks.  Causes of chronic cough include: Chronic bronchitis Asthma Allergies COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease) Smoking Throat disorders , such as croup in young children Some medicines Water can help ease your cough - whether you drink it or add it to the air with a steamy shower or vaporizer. If you have a cold or the flu, antihistamines may work better than non-prescription cough medicines .   Children under four should not have cough medicine.  For children over four, use caution and read labels carefully.

COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is an illness caused by a virus. This virus is a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2. It spreads when a person who has the infection breathes out droplets and very small particles that contain the virus. On this page, you'll find links to resources on important issues such as symptoms, risks, and how you can protect yourself and your family. We also have pages on: COVID-19 testing COVID-19 vaccines Post-COVID conditions (long COVID)

Croup is an inflammation of the vocal cords (larynx) and windpipe (trachea). It causes difficulty breathing, a barking cough, and a hoarse voice. The cause is usually a virus, often parainfluenza virus . Other causes include allergies and reflux . Croup often starts out like a cold. But then the vocal cords and windpipe become swollen, causing the hoarseness and the cough. There may also be a fever and high-pitched noisy sounds when breathing. The symptoms are usually worse at night, and last for about three to five days.
Children between the ages of 6 months and 3 years have the highest risk of getting croup. They may also have more severe symptoms. Croup is more common in the fall and winter. Most cases of viral croup are mild and can be treated at home.  Rarely, croup can become serious and interfere with your child's breathing. If you are worried about your child's breathing, call your health care provider right away.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disease of the mucus and sweat glands. It affects mostly your lungs, pancreas, liver, intestines, sinuses, and sex organs.  CF causes your mucus to be thick and sticky. The mucus clogs the lungs, causing breathing problems and making it easy for bacteria to grow. This can lead to repeated lung infections and lung damage. The symptoms and severity of CF can vary. Some people have serious problems from birth. Others have a milder version of the disease that doesn't show up until they are teens or young adults. Sometimes you will have few symptoms, but later you may have more symptoms. CF is diagnosed through various tests, such as gene, blood, and sweat tests. There is no cure for CF, but treatments have improved greatly in recent years. In the past, most deaths from CF were in children and teenagers. Today, with improved treatments, some people who have CF are living into their forties, fifties, or older. Treatments may include chest physical therapy, nutritional and respiratory therapies , medicines, and exercise. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is emphysema? Emphysema is a type of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). COPD is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. The other main type of COPD is chronic bronchitis . Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. Emphysema affects the air sacs in your lungs. Normally, these sacs are elastic or stretchy. When you breathe in, each air sac fills up with air, like a small balloon. When you breathe out, the air sacs deflate, and the air goes out. In emphysema, the walls between many of the air sacs in the lungs are damaged. This causes the air sacs to lose their shape and become floppy. The damage also can destroy the walls of the air sacs, leading to fewer and larger air sacs instead of many tiny ones. This makes it harder for your lungs to move oxygen in and carbon dioxide out of your body. What causes emphysema? The cause of emphysema is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and the airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause emphysema, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to emphysema. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing emphysema. Who is at risk for emphysema? The risk factors for emphysema include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have emphysema smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace. Age. Most people who have emphysema are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get emphysema are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. What are the symptoms of emphysema? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or wheezing A cough that produces a lot mucus Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Tightness in your chest Some people with emphysema get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, emphysema can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is emphysema diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Other tests tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests What are the treatments for emphysema? There is no cure for emphysema. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat emphysema. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with emphysema are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe emphysema and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling Surgery , usually as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines. There are surgeries to Remove damaged lung tissue Remove large air spaces (bullae) that can form when air sacs are destroyed. The bullae can interfere with breathing. Do a lung transplant . This is might be an option if you have very severe emphysema. If you have emphysema, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can emphysema be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of emphysema, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is head and neck cancer? Head and neck cancer is the name for cancers that develop in the mouth , nose and sinuses , salivary glands , and throat and voice box (larynx). Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell cancers . They begin in the moist tissues that line the head and neck. The cancer cells may spread into deeper tissue as the cancer grows. There are other cancers that develop in the head and neck, such as brain cancer , eye cancer , and esophageal cancer . But they are usually not considered to be head and neck cancers, because those types of cancer and their treatments are different. Who is more likely to develop head and neck cancer? Anyone can get head and neck cancer, but you are more likely to develop it if you: Use tobacco or drink lots of alcohol. Your risk of developing head and neck cancer is even higher if you do both. Are male. Are over age 50. Have a history of head or neck cancer. Have HPV (for cancers in the tonsils and base of the tongue). Are exposed to wood dusts or certain other toxic substances at work (for upper throat, nose, and sinus cancers). Have had radiation exposure to the head and neck (for salivary gland cancer). Have Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection (for upper throat and salivary gland cancers). Are Asian (for upper throat cancer). What are the symptoms of head and neck cancer? The symptoms of head and neck cancer may include: A lump in the neck A sore in the mouth or the throat that does not heal and may be painful A sore throat that does not go away Trouble swallowing A change or hoarseness in the voice Other possible symptoms can depend on the specific type of head and neck cancer. How is head and neck cancer diagnosed? Which exams and tests used to diagnose head and neck cancer can depend on the specific type of cancer. Possible exams and tests may include: A physical exam of the area that might have cancer. Blood and/or urine tests. An endoscopy . A biopsy or other procedure to collect cells from the area that might have cancer. The cells are viewed under a microscope to find out if they are abnormal. Imaging tests . What are the treatments for head and neck cancer? The treatment for head and neck cancer will depend on the specific type of cancer, the stage (how advanced the cancer is), your overall health, and other factors. The treatment options might include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Cancer immunotherapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells In some cases, you may need a combination of treatments. Sometimes surgery can affect how well you can chew, swallow, or talk. Rehabilitation, such as physical therapy, dietary counseling, and speech therapy, may help. Can head and neck cancer be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent head and neck cancer: Not smoking Limiting alcohol use or not drinking at all Getting regular dental exams Talking to your provider about HPV vaccination NIH: National Cancer Institute

Inhalation injuries are acute injuries to your respiratory system and lungs. They can happen if you breathe in toxic substances, such as smoke (from fires), chemicals, particle pollution, and gases. Inhalation injuries can also be caused by extreme heat; these are a type of thermal injuries. Over half of deaths from fires are due to inhalation injuries. Symptoms of inhalation injuries can depend on what you breathed in. But they often include: Coughing and phlegm A scratchy throat Irritated sinuses Shortness of breath Chest pain or tightness Headaches Stinging eyes A runny nose If you have a chronic heart or lung problem, an inhalation injury can make it worse. To make a diagnosis, your health care provider may use a scope to look at your airways and check for damage. Other possible tests include imaging tests of the lungs, blood tests, and lung function tests. If you have an inhalation injury, your health care provider will make sure that your airway is not blocked. Treatment is with oxygen therapy , and in some cases, medicines. Some patients need to use a ventilator to breathe. Most people get better, but some people have permanent lung or breathing problems. Smokers and people who had a severe injury are at a greater risk of having permanent problems. You can take steps to try to prevent inhalation injuries: At home, practice fire safety , which includes preventing fires and having a plan in case there is a fire If there is smoke from a wildfire nearby or lots of particulate pollution in the air, try to limit your time outdoors. Keep your indoor air as clean as possible, by keeping windows closed and using an air filter. If you have asthma, another lung disease, or heart disease, follow your health care provider's advice about your medicines and respiratory management plan. If you are working with chemicals or gases, handle them safely and use protective equipment

Interstitial lung disease is the name for a large group of diseases that inflame or scar the lungs. The inflammation and scarring make it hard to get enough oxygen. The scarring is called pulmonary fibrosis . Breathing in dust or other particles in the air is responsible for some types of interstitial lung diseases. Specific types include: Black lung disease among coal miners, from inhaling coal dust Farmer's lung, from inhaling farm dust Asbestosis, from inhaling asbestos fibers Siderosis, from inhaling iron from mines or welding fumes Silicosis, from inhaling silica dust Other causes include autoimmune diseases or occupational exposures to molds, gases, or fumes. Some types of interstitial lung disease have no known cause. Treatment depends on the type of exposure and the stage of the disease. It may involve medicines, oxygen therapy, or a lung transplant in severe cases.

What is lung cancer? Lung cancer is cancer that forms in tissues of the lung, usually in the cells that line the air passages. It is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women. There are two main types: small cell lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer . These two types grow differently and are treated differently. Non-small cell lung cancer is the more common type. Who more likely to develop lung cancer? Anyone can develop lung cancer, but certain factors raise your risk of getting it: Smoking . This is the most important risk factor for lung cancer. Tobacco smoking causes about 9 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in men and about 8 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in women. The more years you smoke and the more cigarettes you smoke each day, the more your risk goes up.  Your risk is also greater if you smoke a lot and drink alcohol every day or take beta carotene supplements. If you have quit smoking, your risk will be lower than if you had kept smoking. But you will still have a higher risk than people who never smoked. Secondhand smoke , which is the combination of the smoke that comes from a cigarette and the smoke breathed out by a smoker. When you breathe in secondhand smoke, you are exposed to the same cancer-causing agents as smokers, although in smaller amounts. A family history of lung cancer. Being exposed to asbestos , arsenic , chromium, beryllium, nickel, soot, or tar in the workplace. Being exposed to radiation , for example from: Radiation therapy to the breast or chest Radon in the home or workplace Certain imaging tests such as CT scans HIV infection . Your risk is higher if you have HIV. However, smoking rates are higher in people who have HIV, so it's not clear whether the increased risk is from the HIV infection or from smoking. Air pollution . Studies show that living in areas with higher levels of air pollution increases your risk of lung cancer. What are the symptoms of lung cancer? Lung cancer may not cause any signs or symptoms until the cancer is advanced. Sometimes the cancer is found during a chest x-ray done for another condition. The symptoms of lung cancer may include: Chest pain or discomfort A cough that doesn't go away or gets worse over time Coughing up blood Trouble breathing Wheezing Hoarseness Loss of appetite Weight loss for no known reason Feeling very tired Trouble swallowing Swelling in the face and/or veins in the neck How is lung cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have lung cancer, your health care provider: Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Will ask about your family history Will do a physical exam May order certain imaging tests, such as a chest x-ray or chest CT scan May order lab tests, including tests of your blood and sputum May do a procedure to take a biopsy of the lung If you do have lung cancer, your provider will do other tests to find out if it has spread through the lungs, lymph nodes, and the rest of the body. This is called staging. Knowing the type and stage of lung cancer you have helps your provider decide what kind of treatment you need. If you have small-cell lung cancer, your provider may also do genetic testing to look for certain gene changes ( variants ) in your cancer cells. The results of the testing may help guide treatment. What are the treatments for lung cancer? For most patients with lung cancer, current treatments do not cure the cancer. Your treatment will depend on which type of lung cancer you have, how far it has spread, your overall health, and other factors. You may get more than one type of treatment. The treatments for small cell lung cancer may include: Surgery. Chemotherapy . Radiation therapy. Immunotherapy . Laser therapy, which uses a laser beam to kill cancer cells. Endoscopic stent placement. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument used to look at tissues inside the body. It may be used to put in a device called a stent. The stent helps to open an airway that has been blocked by abnormal tissue. The treatments for non-small cell lung cancer may include: Surgery. Radiation therapy. Chemotherapy. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Immunotherapy. Laser therapy. Photodynamic therapy (PDT), which uses a medicine and a certain type of laser light to kill cancer cells. Cryosurgery, which uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. Electrocautery, a treatment that uses a probe or needle heated by an electric current to destroy abnormal tissue. Can lung cancer be prevented? Avoiding the risk factors may help prevent lung cancer. For example, you can: Quit smoking . And if you don't smoke, don't start. Lower your exposure to hazardous substances at work. Lower your exposure to radon. Radon tests can show whether your home has high levels of radon. You can buy a test kit yourself or hire a professional to do the test. NIH: National Cancer Institute

When you breathe, your lungs take in oxygen from the air and deliver it to the bloodstream. The cells in your body need oxygen to work and grow.  During a normal day, you breathe nearly 25,000 times. People with lung disease have difficulty breathing. Millions of people in the U.S. have lung disease. If all types of lung disease are lumped together, it is the number three killer in the United States. The term lung disease refers to many disorders affecting the lungs, such as asthma , COPD , infections like influenza , pneumonia and tuberculosis , lung cancer , and many other breathing problems . Some lung diseases can lead to respiratory failure . Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

A lung transplant removes a person's diseased lung and replaces it with a healthy one.  The healthy lung comes from a donor who has died. Some people get one lung during a transplant. Other people get two. Lung transplants are used for people who are likely to die from lung disease within 1 to 2 years. Their conditions are so severe that other treatments, such as medicines or breathing devices, no longer work. Lung transplants most often are used to treat people who have severe: COPD Cystic fibrosis Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency Pulmonary hypertension Complications of lung transplantation include rejection of the transplanted lung and infection. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

The tissue that lines your lungs, stomach, heart, and other organs is called mesothelium. Mesothelioma, also known as malignant mesothelioma, is cancer of that tissue. It usually starts in the lungs, but can also start in the abdomen or other organs. Malignant mesothelioma is rare but serious. Most people who get it have worked or lived in places where they inhaled or swallowed asbestos particles. After being exposed to asbestos, it usually takes a long time for the disease to form. Symptoms include: Trouble breathing Cough Pain under the rib cage Pain, swelling, or lumps in the abdomen Weight loss for no known reason Blood clots Constipation Fatigue Sometimes it is hard to tell the difference between malignant mesothelioma and lung cancer. To find out if you have mesothelioma, your health care provider will likely use a physical exam, imaging tests , and a biopsy . Malignant mesothelioma is often found when it is advanced. This makes it harder to treat. Treatment options may include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Immunotherapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your pleura is a large, thin sheet of tissue that wraps around the outside of your lungs and lines the inside of your chest cavity. Between the layers of the pleura is a very thin space. Normally it's filled with a small amount of fluid. The fluid helps the two layers of the pleura glide smoothly past each other as your lungs breathe air in and out. Disorders of the pleura include: Pleurisy - inflammation of the pleura that causes sharp pain with breathing Pleural effusion - excess fluid in the pleural space Pneumothorax - buildup of air or gas in the pleural space Hemothorax - buildup of blood in the pleural space Many different conditions can cause pleural problems. Viral infection is the most common cause of pleurisy. The most common cause of pleural effusion is congestive heart failure . Lung diseases, like COPD , tuberculosis, and acute lung injury, cause pneumothorax. Injury to the chest is the most common cause of hemothorax. Treatment focuses on removing fluid, air, or blood from the pleural space, relieving symptoms, and treating the underlying condition. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is pneumonia? Pneumonia is an infection in one or both of your lungs. It causes the air sacs of your lungs to fill up with fluid or pus. Pneumonia can range from mild to severe, depending on what caused it, your age, and your overall health. What causes pneumonia? Bacterial , viral , and fungal infections can cause pneumonia. Bacteria are the most common cause. Bacterial pneumonia can occur on its own. It can also develop after you've had certain viral infections such as a cold or the flu . Several different types of bacteria can cause pneumonia, including: Streptococcus pneumoniae Legionella pneumophila ; this type of pneumonia is often called Legionnaires' disease Mycoplasma pneumoniae Chlamydia pneumoniae Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) Viruses that infect the respiratory tract may cause pneumonia. Viral pneumonia is often mild and goes away on its own within a few weeks. But sometimes it is serious enough that you need to get treatment in a hospital. If you have viral pneumonia, you are at risk of also getting bacterial pneumonia. The different viruses that can cause pneumonia include: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) Some common cold and flu viruses SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 Fungal pneumonia is more common in people who have chronic health problems or weakened immune systems . Some of the types include: Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) Valley fever (Coccidioidomycosis) Histoplasmosis Cryptococcal pneumonia Aspiration can also cause pneumonia. It can happen when you aspirate (accidentally breathe in) food or fluid into the lungs. If you are not able to cough out the food or fluid, it may cause an infection. Who is more likely to develop pneumonia? Anyone can develop pneumonia, but certain factors can increase your risk: Age; the risk is higher for children who are age 2 and under and adults age 65 and older. Exposure to certain chemicals, pollutants, or toxic fumes. Lifestyle habits, such as smoking , heavy alcohol use , and malnourishment . Being in a hospital, especially if you are in the ICU . Being sedated and/or on a ventilator raises the risk even more. Having a lung disease . Having a weakened immune system. Have trouble coughing or swallowing , from a stroke or other condition. Recently having been sick with a cold or the flu. Other chronic (long-lasting) health conditions, including diabetes , heart failure , sickle cell disease , liver disease , and kidney disease . What are the symptoms of pneumonia? The symptoms of pneumonia can range from mild to severe and include: Fever Chills Cough, usually with phlegm (a type of thick mucus made in your lungs) Shortness of breath Chest pain when you breathe or cough Nausea and/or vomiting Diarrhea The symptoms can vary for different groups. Newborns and infants may not show any signs of the infection. Others may vomit and have a fever and cough. They might seem sick, with no energy, or be restless. Older adults and people who have serious illnesses or weak immune systems may have fewer and milder symptoms. They may even have a lower-than-normal temperature. Older adults who have pneumonia sometimes may feel weak or suddenly get confused. What other problems can pneumonia cause? Sometimes pneumonia can cause serious complications such as: Bacteremia, which happens when the bacteria move into the bloodstream. It is serious and can lead to septic shock . Lung abscesses , which are collections of pus in cavities of the lungs. Pleural disorders , which are conditions that affect the pleura. The pleura is the tissue that covers the outside of the lungs and lines the inside of your chest cavity. Kidney failure . Respiratory failure . How is pneumonia diagnosed? Sometimes pneumonia can be hard to diagnose. This is because it can cause some of the same symptoms as a cold or the flu. It may take time for you to realize that you have a more serious condition. To find out if you have pneumonia, your health care provider: Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Will do a physical exam, which includes listening to your lungs with a stethoscope May order various tests, such as: A chest x-ray Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC) to see if your immune system is actively fighting an infection A blood culture to find out whether you have a bacterial infection that has spread to your bloodstream If you are in the hospital, have serious symptoms, are older, or have other health problems, you may also have more tests, such as: Sputum test , which checks for bacteria in a sample of your sputum (mucus that is brought up from the lungs by coughing). Chest CT scan to see how much of your lungs are affected. It may also show if you have complications such as lung abscesses or pleural effusions (a buildup of fluid in the pleural space). Pleural fluid culture , which checks for bacteria in a fluid sample that was taken from the pleural space. Pulse oximetry or blood oxygen level test, to check how much oxygen is in your blood. Bronchoscopy, a procedure used to look inside your lungs' airways. What are the treatments for pneumonia? Treatment for pneumonia depends on the type of pneumonia, which germ is causing it, and how severe it is: Antibiotics treat bacterial pneumonia and some types of fungal pneumonia. They do not work for viral pneumonia. In some cases, your provider may prescribe antiviral medicines for viral pneumonia. Antifungal medicines treat other types of fungal pneumonia. You may need to be treated in a hospital if your symptoms are severe or if you are at risk for complications. While there, you may get additional treatments. For example, if your blood oxygen level is low, you may receive oxygen therapy . It may take time to recover from pneumonia. Some people feel better within a week. For other people, it can take a month or more. Can pneumonia be prevented? Vaccines can help prevent pneumonia caused by pneumococcal bacteria or the flu virus . Washing your hands often , not smoking, and having a healthy lifestyle may also help prevent pneumonia. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is a pulmonary embolism (PE)? A pulmonary embolism (PE) is a sudden blockage in a lung artery. It usually happens when a blood clot breaks loose and travels through the bloodstream to the lungs. PE is a serious condition that can cause: Permanent damage to the lungs Low oxygen levels in your blood Damage to other organs in your body from not getting enough oxygen PE can be life-threatening, especially if a clot is large, or if there are many clots. What causes a pulmonary embolism (PE)? The cause is usually a blood clot that breaks loose and travels through the bloodstream to the lungs. The clot is usually a deep vein thrombosis (DVT), a clot in the leg. In rare cases, material such as air bubbles, clumps of fat, or parts of a tumor can block the lung artery and cause PE. Who is more likely to develop a pulmonary embolism (PE)? Anyone can get a pulmonary embolism (PE), but certain things can raise your risk of PE: Having surgery, especially joint replacement surgery. Certain medical conditions, including Cancers Heart diseases Lung diseases A broken hip or leg bone or other trauma Hormone-based medicines, such as birth control pills or hormone replacement therapy . Pregnancy and childbirth. The risk is highest for about six weeks after childbirth. Not moving for long periods, such as being on bed rest, having a cast, or taking a long plane flight. Age. Your risk increases as you get older, especially after age 40. Family history and genetics. Certain genetic changes that can increase your risk of blood clots and PE. Obesity . What are the symptoms of a pulmonary embolism (PE)? Symptoms of PE include: Shortness of breath Rapid breathing Chest pain or discomfort, which usually gets worse when you cough or take a deep breath Increased heart rate Coughing up blood Very low blood pressure, lightheadedness, or fainting Sometimes people with PE don't have any symptoms until they have serious complications, such as pulmonary hypertension (high blood pressure in the arteries to your lungs). How is a pulmonary embolism (PE) diagnosed? It can be difficult to diagnose PE. To find out if you have a PE, your health care provider will: Take your medical history, including asking about your symptoms and risk factors for PE Do a physical exam Likely order some tests, including various imaging and blood tests What are the treatments for a pulmonary embolism (PE)? If you have PE, you need medical treatment right away. The goal of treatment is to break up clots and help keep other clots from forming. Treatment options include medicines and procedures. Medicines : Anticoagulants, or blood thinners , keep blood clots from getting larger and stop new clots from forming. You might get them as an injection, a pill, or through an I.V. (intravenous). They can cause bleeding, especially if you are taking other medicines that also thin your blood, such as aspirin. Thrombolytics are medicines to dissolve blood clots. You may get them if you have large clots that cause severe symptoms or other serious complications. Thrombolytics can cause sudden bleeding, so they are used if your PE is serious and may be life-threatening. Procedures : Catheter-assisted thrombus removal uses a flexible tube to reach a blood clot in your lung. Your health care provider can insert a tool in the tube to break up the clot or to deliver medicine through the tube. Usually you will get medicine to put you to sleep for this procedure. A vena cava filter may be used in some people who cannot take blood thinners. Your health care provider inserts a filter inside a large vein called the vena cava. The filter catches blood clots before they travel to the lungs, which prevents pulmonary embolism. But the filter does not stop new blood clots from forming. Can pulmonary embolism (PE) be prevented? Preventing new blood clots can prevent PE. Prevention may include: Continuing to take blood thinners. It's also important to get regular checkups with your provider, to make sure that the dosage of your medicines is working to prevent blood clots but not causing bleeding. Heart-healthy lifestyle changes, such as heart-healthy eating, exercise, and, if you smoke, quitting smoking . Using compression stockings to prevent deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Moving your legs when sitting for long periods of time (such as on long trips). Moving around as soon as possible after surgery or being confined to a bed. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Pulmonary fibrosis is a condition in which the tissue deep in your lungs becomes scarred over time.  This tissue gets thick and stiff.  That makes it hard for you to catch your breath, and your blood may not get enough oxygen. Causes of pulmonary fibrosis include environmental pollutants, some medicines, some connective tissue diseases, and interstitial lung disease. Interstitial lung disease is the name for a large group of diseases that inflame or scar the lungs. In most cases, the cause cannot be found.  This is called idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Symptoms include: Shortness of breath A dry, hacking cough that doesn't get better Fatigue Weight loss for no known reason Aching muscles and joints Clubbing, which is the widening and rounding of the tips of the fingers or toes Your doctor may use your medical history, imaging tests, a biopsy, and lung function tests to diagnose pulmonary fibrosis. There is no cure. Treatments can help with symptoms and improve your quality of life. They include medicines, oxygen therapy, pulmonary rehabilitation, or a lung transplant. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is pulmonary hypertension? Pulmonary hypertension, sometimes called PH, is a serious condition that affects the blood vessels in the lungs. It develops when the blood pressure in your lungs is higher than normal. Your heart pumps blood to your lungs so they can add oxygen to the blood. The blood goes back to your heart. From there, it travels to the rest of your body so that your tissues can get the oxygen that they need. The blood moves from your heart to your lungs through blood vessels called pulmonary arteries. If the pulmonary arteries become damaged, narrowed, or blocked, the blood does not flow through them as well. This can increase the blood pressure in the arteries and cause pulmonary hypertension. There are different types of pulmonary hypertension, including pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). The different types are based on what caused the disease. What causes pulmonary hypertension? Pulmonary hypertension can develop on its own or be caused by another condition. Sometimes the cause is unknown or is not clear. Some of the possible causes include: Heart diseases , including left-sided heart failure and congenital heart disease Lung diseases such as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), interstitial lung disease , emphysema , and sleep apnea Other medical conditions such as: Liver diseases Sickle cell disease Pulmonary embolism (blood clots in the lungs) Connective tissue disorders like scleroderma Who is more likely to develop pulmonary hypertension? Certain factors can make you more likely to develop pulmonary hypertension, such as: Your age. The risk increases as you get older. The condition is usually diagnosed between ages 30 and 60. Your environment. Being exposed to asbestos or having certain infections caused by parasites can raise your risk. Your family history and genetics. Certain genetic disorders , such as Down syndrome , congenital heart disease, and Gaucher disease , can raise your risk of pulmonary hypertension. So can a family history of blood clots . Your lifestyle habits. Smoking and illegal drug use can raise your risk of developing pulmonary hypertension. Certain medicines. For example, some medicines used to treat cancer and depression can make you more likely to develop pulmonary hypertension. Your sex. Pulmonary hypertension is more common in women than in men. What are the symptoms of pulmonary hypertension? The symptoms of pulmonary hypertension are sometimes hard to recognize and are similar to the symptoms of other medical conditions. So sometimes it can take years for someone to get diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension. The symptoms of pulmonary hypertension may include: Shortness of breath Chest pain or pressure Dizziness that may lead to fainting Fatigue Swelling of the abdomen, legs, or feet Heart palpitations (the feeling that your heart is pounding or beating too fast) What other problems can pulmonary hypertension cause? Pulmonary hypertension can get worse over time and lead to serious problems, including: Anemia , which can cause your body to not get enough oxygen-rich blood Arrhythmias , problems with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat Blood clots in the pulmonary arteries Bleeding in the lungs Heart failure Liver damage Pericardial effusion, a collection of fluid around the heart Serious pregnancy complications How is pulmonary hypertension diagnosed? To find out if you have pulmonary hypertension, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history and symptoms Will do a physical exam, which may include checking your blood oxygen, listening to your heart and lungs, and checking your blood pressure Will likely order some tests, such as: Blood tests to look for blood clots, stress on the heart, or anemia Heart imaging tests, such as a cardiac MRI Lung imaging tests, such as chest x-ray An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) What are the treatments for pulmonary hypertension? Often there is no cure for pulmonary hypertension, but treatments can help manage your symptoms. Your provider will work with you to come up with a treatment plan. It will be based on your needs and the cause of the pulmonary hypertension. The plan may include: Healthy lifestyle changes, such as: Healthy eating , which includes eating less salt Regular physical activity , which may be done through pulmonary rehabilitation Medicines, such as: Blood thinners Medicines to control the rate blood is pumped throughout the body Medicines to relax blood vessels and allow the blood to flow better Medicine to reduce swelling (diuretics) Oxygen therapy Procedures to reduce pressure in the heart or pulmonary artery In some severe cases, a lung transplant NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is respiratory failure? Respiratory failure is a condition in which your blood doesn't have enough oxygen or has too much carbon dioxide. Sometimes you can have both problems. When you breathe, your lungs take in oxygen. The oxygen passes into your blood, which carries it to your organs. Your organs, such as your heart and brain, need this oxygen-rich blood to work well. Another part of breathing is removing the carbon dioxide from the blood and breathing it out. Having too much carbon dioxide in your blood can harm your organs. What causes respiratory failure? Conditions that affect your breathing can cause respiratory failure. These conditions may affect the muscles, nerves, bones, or tissues that support breathing. Or they may affect the lungs directly. These conditions include: Diseases that affect the lungs , such as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), cystic fibrosis , pneumonia , pulmonary embolism , and COVID-19 Conditions that affect the nerves and muscles that control breathing, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), muscular dystrophy , spinal cord injuries , and stroke Problems with the spine, such as scoliosis (a curve in the spine). They can affect the bones and muscles used for breathing. Damage to the tissues and ribs around the lungs. An injury to the chest can cause this damage. Drug or alcohol overdose Inhalation injuries , such as from inhaling smoke (from fires) or harmful fumes What are the symptoms of respiratory failure? The symptoms of respiratory failure depend on the cause and the levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in your blood. A low oxygen level in the blood can cause shortness of breath and air hunger (the feeling that you can't breathe in enough air). Your skin, lips, and fingernails may also have a bluish color. A high carbon dioxide level can cause rapid breathing and confusion. Some people who have respiratory failure may become very sleepy or lose consciousness. They also may have arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat). You may have these symptoms if your brain and heart are not getting enough oxygen. How is respiratory failure diagnosed? Your health care provider will diagnose respiratory failure based on: Your medical history A physical exam, which often includes Listening to your lungs to check for abnormal sounds Listening to your heart to check for arrhythmia Looking for a bluish color on your skin, lips, and fingernails Diagnostic tests, such as Pulse oximetry, a small sensor that uses a light to measure how much oxygen is in your blood. The sensor goes on the end of your finger or on your ear. Arterial blood gas test, a test that measures the oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in your blood. The blood sample is taken from an artery, usually in your wrist. Once you are diagnosed with respiratory failure, your provider will look for what is causing it. Tests for this often include a chest x-ray. If your provider thinks you may have arrhythmia because of the respiratory failure, you may have an EKG (electrocardiogram). This is simple, painless test that detects and records your heart's electrical activity. What are the treatments for respiratory failure? Treatment for respiratory failure depends on: Whether it is acute (short-term) or chronic (ongoing) How severe it is What is causing it Acute respiratory failure can be a medical emergency. You may need treatment in intensive care unit at a hospital. Chronic respiratory failure can often be treated at home. But if your chronic respiratory failure is severe, you might need treatment in a long-term care center. One of the main goals of treatment is to get oxygen to your lungs and other organs and remove carbon dioxide from your body. Another goal is to treat the cause of the condition. Treatments may include: Oxygen therapy , through a nasal cannula (two small plastic tubes that go in your nostrils) or through a mask that fits over your nose and mouth Tracheostomy, a surgically-made hole that goes through the front of your neck and into your windpipe. A breathing tube, also called a tracheostomy, or trach tube, is placed in the hole to help you breathe. Ventilator, a breathing machine that blows air into your lungs. It also carries carbon dioxide out of your lungs. Other breathing treatments, such as noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV), which uses mild air pressure to keep your airways open while you sleep. Another treatment is a special bed that rocks back and forth, to help you breathe in and out. Fluids, often through an intravenous (IV), to improve blood flow throughout your body. They also provide nutrition. Medicines for discomfort Treatments for the cause of the respiratory failure. These treatments may include medicines and procedures. If you have respiratory failure, see your health care provider for ongoing medical care. Your provider may suggest pulmonary rehabilitation . If your respiratory failure is chronic, make sure that you know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You need emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. You should call your provider if you notice that your symptoms are worsening or if you have new signs and symptoms. Living with respiratory failure may cause fear, anxiety , depression , and stress . Talk therapy, medicines, and support groups can help you feel better. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)? Respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, is a common respiratory virus. It usually causes mild, cold-like symptoms. But it can cause serious lung infections, especially in infants, older adults, and people with serious medical problems. How is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) spread? RSV spreads from person to person through: The air by coughing and sneezing Direct contact, such as kissing the face of a child who has RSV Touching an object or surface with the virus on it, then touching your mouth, nose, or eyes before washing your hands People who have an RSV infection are usually contagious for 3 to 8 days. But sometimes infants and people with weakened immune systems can continue to spread the virus for as long as 4 weeks. Who is at risk for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? RSV can affect people of all ages. But it is very common in small children; nearly all children become infected with RSV by age 2. In the United States, RSV infections usually occur during RSV season, which is usually fall through spring. Certain people are at higher risk of having a severe RSV infection: Infants Older adults, especially those ages 65 and older People with chronic medical conditions such as heart or lung disease People with weakened immune systems What are the symptoms of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? The symptoms of RSV infection usually start about 4 to 6 days after infection. They include: Runny nose Decrease in appetite Cough Sneezing Fever Wheezing These symptoms usually appear in stages instead of all at once. In very young infants, the only symptoms may be irritability, decreased activity, and trouble breathing. RSV can also cause more severe infections, especially in people at high risk. These infections include bronchiolitis, an inflammation of the small airways in the lung, and pneumonia , an infection of the lungs. How are respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, including asking about symptoms. A physical exam. A lab test of nasal fluid or another respiratory specimen to check for RSV. This is usually done for people with severe infection. Tests to check for complications in people with severe infection. The tests may include a chest x-ray and blood and urine tests. What are the treatments for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? There is no specific treatment for RSV infection. Most infections go away on their own in a week or two. Over-the-counter pain relievers can help with the fever and pain. However, do not give aspirin to children. And do not give cough medicine to children under four. It is also important to get enough fluids to prevent dehydration . Some people with severe infection may need to be hospitalized. There, they might get oxygen , a breathing tube, or a ventilator. Can respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections be prevented? There are some vaccines to protect against RVS illness. Two of them are for people ages 60 and older. If you are in this age group, talk to your provider about whether an RSV vaccine would be right for you. There is also a vaccine is for pregnant people. It is given between 32 and 36 weeks of pregnancy. It helps protect their newborn babies from RSV illness for the first 6 months of life. There are two medicines to help prevent severe RSV illness in babies and young children. These medicines may help prevent severe RSV illness, but they can't cure or treat children who already have RSV. And they cannot prevent an RSV infection. Both medicines are given by injections (shots). One medicine is given to infants who are younger than 8 months during their first RSV season. This includes infants who are born during RSV season. This medicine may also be given to some children between the ages of 8 and 19 months who are at high risk for severe RSV illness. For example, they might be at high risk because they: Were born prematurely Have congenital heart disease Have chronic lung disease Have a weakened immune system The other medicine is given monthly during RSV season. It is for children under 24 months of age who are at high risk for severe RSV illness. There are also some steps you can take to lower your risk of getting or spreading an RSV infection, including: Washing your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds Avoiding touching your face, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact, such as kissing, shaking hands, and sharing cups and eating utensils, with others if you are sick or they are sick Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue. Then throw away the tissue and wash your hands Staying home when sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Your throat is a tube that carries food to your esophagus and air to your windpipe and larynx. The technical name for your throat is the pharynx. Throat problems are common. You've probably had a sore throat . The cause is usually a viral infection, but other causes include allergies, infection with strep bacteria or the leaking of stomach acids back up into the esophagus, called GERD . Other problems that affect the throat include: Tonsillitis - inflammation of the tonsils Cancer Croup - inflammation, usually in small children, which causes a barking cough Laryngitis - swelling of the voice box, which can cause a hoarse voice or loss of voice Most throat problems are minor and go away on their own. Treatments, when needed, depend on the problem.

Your trachea, or windpipe, is one part of your airway system. Airways are pipes that carry oxygen-rich air to your lungs. They also carry carbon dioxide, a waste gas, out of your lungs. When you inhale, air travels from your nose, through your larynx, and down your windpipe. The windpipe splits into two bronchi that enter your lungs. Problems with the trachea include narrowing, inflammation, and some inherited conditions.  You may need a procedure called a tracheostomy to help you breathe if you have swallowing problems, or have conditions that affect coughing or block your airways.  You might also need a tracheostomy if you are in critical care and need to be on a breathing machine. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is tuberculosis (TB)? Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial disease that usually attacks the lungs. But it can also attack other parts of the body, including the kidneys, spine, and brain. Not everyone infected with TB bacteria (germs) becomes sick. So, there are two types of TB conditions: Inactive (latent) TB infection , where the TB germs live in your body but don't make you sick. TB disease (active TB) where you get sick from the TB germs. TB disease can almost always be cured with antibiotics . But if it's not treated properly, it can be fatal. TB is found in the U.S., but it is more common in certain other countries. What causes tuberculosis (TB)? TB is caused by bacteria (germs) called Mycobacterium tuberculosis . The germs spread from person to person through the air. People who have TB disease in their throat or lungs spread the germs in the air when they cough, sneeze, talk, or sing. If you breathe in the air that has the germs, you can get TB. TB is not spread by touching, kissing, or sharing food or dishes. You're more likely to catch TB from people you live or work with than from people you see for shorter amounts of time. Who is more likely to get infected with tuberculosis (TB) germs? Anyone who is near a person with TB disease can get infected with the germs. You are more likely to be near someone with TB disease if you: Were born in or often travel to countries where TB disease is common Are a health care worker Work or live in a place where TB is more common, such as shelters for people without homes, jails, and nursing homes Who is more likely to develop TB disease? Certain people are more likely to get sick with TB disease after they get infected. They include people who: Have HIV Became infected with TB in the last 2 years Have other diseases, such as diabetes , that make it hard for your body to fight TB germs Have alcohol use disorder (AUD) or inject illegal drugs Were not treated correctly for TB in the past Are under age 5 Are an older adult Take medicines that weaken the immune system , such as medicines taken after an organ transplant , steroids , and specialized treatments for certain autoimmune diseases What are the symptoms of tuberculosis (TB)? Most people who have TB germs in their bodies don't get sick with TB disease. Instead, they have inactive TB infection. With an inactive TB infection, you: Don't have symptoms Can't spread TB to others Could get sick with active TB disease in the future if your immune system becomes weak for another reason Need to take medicine to prevent getting sick with active TB disease in the future If you have TB disease , the TB germs are active, meaning that they are growing (multiplying) inside your body and making you sick. If the TB is growing in your lungs or throat, you can spread the TB germs to other people. You can get sick with TB disease weeks to years after you're infected with TB germs. With TB disease, your symptoms will depend on where the TB is growing in your body: General symptoms may include: Chills and fever Night sweats (heavy sweating during sleep) Losing weight without trying Loss of appetite Weakness or fatigue Symptoms from TB disease in your lungs may include: A cough that lasts longer than 3 weeks Coughing up blood or sputum (a thick mucus from the lungs) Chest pain How is tuberculosis (TB) diagnosed? Your health care provider or your local health department can test you to find out if you have TB germs in your body. They will give you either a TB skin or blood test . If your test shows that you have TB germs, you'll need to have other tests to see if the germs are actively growing: Tests for TB disease in the lungs usually include testing samples of your sputum and having chest x-rays . Tests for TB disease in other parts of your body may include tests of urine and tissue samples . You may need a TB test if you have symptoms of TB disease or if you are at high risk because you are more likely to be near someone with TB disease. People who have HIV also need to get tested for TB. HIV weakens your immune system. So if you have both HIV and inactive TB, the TB can quickly become active TB disease. You will need treatment for the inactive TB as soon as possible to prevent active TB disease. What is the treatment for tuberculosis (TB)? The treatment for both inactive TB infection and TB disease is antibiotics. To make sure you get rid of all the TB germs in your body, it's very important to follow the directions for taking your medicine. If you don't follow the directions, the TB germs in your body could change and become antibiotic resistant . That means the medicine may stop working and your TB may become hard to cure. For inactive TB infections , you need to take medicines for three, four, six, or nine months, depending on the treatment plan. Treatment helps make sure you don't get TB disease in the future. For active TB disease , you usually need to take medicines for four, six, or nine months, depending on the treatment plan. Treatment will almost always cure you if you take your pills the right way. For TB disease in your lungs or throat , you'll need to stay home for a few weeks, so you don't spread disease to other people. You can protect the people you live with by: Covering your nose and mouth. Opening windows when possible. Not getting too close to them. For drug-resistant TB disease, which means that the TB germs are resistant to certain TB medicines, you will need to take special medicines. Treatment may take a long time, sometimes months or years. The medicines can cause side effects . Your provider will closely monitor your treatment to make sure the medicines are working. By following medical advice for TB testing and treatment, you can keep yourself healthy and help stop the spread of TB. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is whooping cough? Whooping cough, or pertussis, is a respiratory infection that can cause coughing fits. In serious cases, the coughing can become violent and rapid. You may cough so hard that you vomit . The name of the disease comes from the whooping noise you might make when you try to breathe in after coughing. Whooping cough is very contagious and can affect anyone. But it can be especially serious in babies who did not yet get the vaccine. About half of babies under age one who get whooping cough need care in the hospital. What causes whooping cough? Whooping cough is caused by a type of bacteria called Bordetella pertussis. It spreads from person to person. People who have pertussis usually spread it through coughing, sneezing, or breathing very close to someone. It can also sometimes be spread by touching an infected surface and then touching your nose or mouth. If you get pertussis, you are contagious for about 2 weeks after you start coughing. Antibiotics may shorten the time that you are contagious. What are the symptoms of whooping cough? The symptoms of pertussis usually start within 5 to 10 days after you are exposed. But sometimes you may not get symptoms until up to 3 weeks later. Whooping cough usually starts with cold-like symptoms. They may last for 1 to 2 weeks and can include: Runny nose Mild fever Mild, occasional cough The early symptoms in babies can be different. They may only cough a little bit, or they may not cough at all. Babies may have apnea, which means that there is a pause in breathing. They may start to turn blue. If this happens, get medical care for your baby right away. As whopping cough gets worse, the symptoms may include: Fits of many, rapid coughs followed by a high-pitched "whoop" sound Vomiting during or after coughing fits Exhaustion after coughing fits The coughing fits get worse and start happening more often, especially at night. You may have them for up to 10 weeks or more. Recovery from this can happen slowly. Your cough gets milder and happens less often. The coughing fits can come back if you have another respiratory infection, even months after you first got whooping cough. How is whooping cough diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose whooping cough : A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam A lab test which involves taking a sample of mucus from the back of the throat through the nose. This may be done with a swab or syringe filled with saline. The sample is tested for the bacteria that causes whooping cough. Blood test Chest x-ray What are the treatments for whooping cough? The treatment for whooping cough is usually antibiotics. Early treatment is very important. It may make your infection less serious and can also help prevent spreading the disease to others. Treatment after you have been sick for 3 weeks or longer may not help. The bacteria are gone from your body by then, even though you usually still have symptoms. This is because the bacteria have already done damage to your body. Whooping cough can sometimes be very serious and require treatment in the hospital. Can whooping cough be prevented? Vaccines are the best way to prevent whooping cough. There are two vaccines in the United States that can help prevent whooping cough: DTaP and Tdap. These vaccines also provide protection against tetanus and diphtheria . Babies and other people at high risk serious disease should be kept away from people who have whooping cough. Sometimes health care providers give antibiotics to family members of people who have had whooping cough or people who have been exposed to it. The antibiotics may prevent them from getting the disease. You may also help prevent the spread of whooping cough (and other respiratory diseases) by: Washing your hands often with soap and water. You can use an alcohol-based hand rub if soap and water are not available. Avoiding touching your face with unwashed hands Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch, including toys Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or upper shirt sleeve, not hands Staying home when sick Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

There are many reasons why you might have bad breath.  You can get it if you don't brush and floss regularly. Bacteria that build up in your mouth and between your teeth produce the bad odor. Other problems in your mouth, such as gum disease , dry mouth , or cavities , may also cause it. Sinusitis or problems with your nose may be to blame. You can also have bad breath if you eat some foods, like raw onions, garlic, or cabbage. And of course smoking causes its own bad smell. Some diseases and medicines can cause a specific breath odor. Having good dental habits , like brushing and flossing regularly, help fight bad breath. Mouthwashes, mints or chewing gum may make your breath fresher. If you have a disease that causes the bad breath, treating the disease may help give you fresher breath.

Canker sores are small, round sores in your mouth . They can be on the inside of your cheek, under your tongue, or in the back of your throat. They usually have a red edge and a gray center. They can be quite painful. They are not the same as cold sores , which are caused by herpes simplex. Canker sores aren't contagious. They may happen if you have a viral infection. They may also be triggered by stress, food allergies, lack of vitamins and minerals, hormonal changes or menstrual periods. In some cases the cause is unknown. In most cases, the sores go away by themselves. Some ointments, creams or rinses may help with the pain. Avoiding hot, spicy food while you have a canker sore also helps.

Healthy teeth are important to your child's overall health. From the time your child is born, there are things you can do to promote healthy teeth and prevent cavities . For babies, you should clean teeth with a soft, clean cloth or baby's toothbrush.  Avoid putting the baby to bed with a bottle and check teeth regularly for spots or stains. For all children, you should: Start using a pea-sized amount of fluoride toothpaste when they are two years old. You might start sooner, if a dentist or doctor suggests it. Provide healthy foods and limit sweet snacks and drinks Schedule regular dental check-ups Forming good habits at a young age can help your child have healthy teeth for life. NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

Cleft lip and cleft palate are birth defects that occur when a baby's lip or mouth do not form properly.  They happen early during pregnancy. A baby can have a cleft lip, a cleft palate, or both. A cleft lip happens if the tissue that makes up the lip does not join completely before birth. This causes an opening in the upper lip. The opening can be a small slit or a large opening that goes through the lip into the nose. It can be on one or both sides of the lip or, rarely, in the middle of the lip. Children with a cleft lip also can have a cleft palate. The roof of the mouth is called the "palate." With a cleft palate, the tissue that makes up the roof of the mouth does not join correctly.  Babies may have both the front and back parts of the palate open, or they may have only one part open. Children with a cleft lip or a cleft palate often have problems with feeding and talking. They also might have ear infections, hearing loss, and problems with their teeth. Often, surgery can close the lip and palate. Cleft lip surgery is usually done before age 12 months, and cleft palate surgery is done before 18 months. Many children have other complications. They may need additional surgeries, dental and orthodontic care, and speech therapy as they get older. With treatment, most children with clefts do well and lead a healthy life. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Cold sores are caused by a contagious virus called herpes simplex virus (HSV). There are two types of HSV. Type 1 usually causes oral herpes, or cold sores. Type 1 herpes virus infects more than half of the U.S. population by the time they reach their 20s. Type 2 usually affects the genital area . Some people have no symptoms from the infection. But others develop painful and unsightly cold sores. Cold sores usually occur outside the mouth, on or around the lips. When they are inside the mouth, they are usually on the gums or the roof of the mouth. They are not the same as canker sores , which are not contagious. There is no cure for cold sores. They normally go away on their own in a few weeks.  Antiviral medicines can help them heal faster.  They can also help to prevent cold sores in people who often get them. Other medicines can help with the pain and discomfort of the sores. These include ointments that numb the blisters, soften the crusts of the sores, or dry them out. Protecting your lips from the sun with sunblock lip balm can also help.

It's important to take care of your mouth and teeth starting in childhood . If you don't, you could have problems with your teeth and gums - like cavities or even tooth loss. Here's how to keep your mouth and teeth healthy: Brush your teeth twice a day with a fluoride toothpaste Clean between your teeth every day with floss or another type of between-the-teeth cleaner Snack smart - limit sugary snacks Don't smoke or chew tobacco See your dentist or oral health professional regularly NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

Dentures are false teeth made to replace teeth you have lost. They can be complete or partial. Complete dentures cover your entire upper or lower jaw. Partials replace one or a few teeth. Dentures may feel strange at first. Speaking and eating may feel different. Be careful when wearing dentures because they may make it harder for you to feel hot foods and liquids. Also, you may not notice biting on a bone from your food. In the beginning, your dentist may want to see you often to make sure the dentures fit. Over time, your mouth will change and you may need to have your dentures adjusted or replaced. Be sure to let your dentist handle these adjustments. If your dentures move too much in your mouth, denture adhesive may help. In some cases, your dentist may suggest that you switch to dental implants. They are permanent, and they replace both the roots and teeth. Keep your dentures clean and free from food that can cause stains, bad breath, or swollen gums. Brush them every day with a denture care product. Take your dentures out of your mouth at night, and put them in water or a denture-cleansing liquid. NIH: National Institute on Aging

What is saliva? Saliva, or spit, is made by your salivary glands. It helps keep you and your mouth healthy. For example: It moistens and breaks down the foods you eat, which makes it easier for you to chew and swallow. It washes away small food pieces from your teeth and gums, which helps fight against tooth decay . It contains minerals such as calcium and phosphate, which can also help fight tooth decay. It contains antibodies that can fight against infections of the mouth and throat. Antibodies are proteins that your immune system makes to fight foreign substances such as viruses and bacteria. What is dry mouth? Having dry mouth, also called xerostomia, means that you don't have enough saliva to keep your mouth wet. Everyone has a dry mouth once in a while, like when you are nervous or stressed. But if you have a dry mouth all or most of the time, it can be uncomfortable. It can make chewing, swallowing , and even talking difficult. It also raises your risk for tooth decay or infections in the mouth. What causes dry mouth? There are many possible causes of dry mouth, including: Side effects of certain medicines , such as some medicines for high blood pressure , depression , and bladder-control issues Diseases such as Sjogren's syndrome , HIV , salivary gland disorders , and diabetes Radiation therapy , which can damage your salivary glands if they are exposed to radiation during the treatment Chemotherapy , which can make your saliva thicker and cause your mouth to feel dry Nerve damage, when it involves the nerves that tell salivary glands to make saliva Breathing through your mouth Use of alcohol, tobacco, or other substances What are the symptoms of dry mouth? The symptoms of dry mouth may include: A sticky, dry feeling in your mouth Trouble chewing, swallowing, tasting, or speaking A burning feeling in your mouth A dry feeling in your throat Cracked lips A dry, rough tongue Mouth sores An infection in your mouth Bad breath How is the cause of dry mouth diagnosed? If you have dry mouth, it's important to find out the cause. To do that, your health care provider or dentist will review your medical history, examine your mouth, and ask about any medicines you take. They may also suggest blood tests or a test that measures how much saliva you produce. What are the treatments for dry mouth? Treatment for dry mouth depends on the cause. For example, if a medicine is causing dry mouth, your provider or dentist may suggest adjusting the dosage or switching medicines. In some cases, they might give you artificial saliva or a medicine to help your salivary glands work better. There are also several things you can do to help relieve your symptoms: Drink plenty of water Avoid drinks with caffeine , which can dry out your mouth Chew sugarless gum or suck on sugarless hard candy to stimulate saliva flow Avoid spicy or salty foods because they can cause pain if your mouth is dry Avoid alcohol and tobacco Using a humidifier at night Use a mouthwash made for dry mouth Since dry mouth can raise your risk of tooth decay, it's important to brush and floss your teeth regularly and see your dentist at least twice a year. NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

If you have gum disease, you're not alone. Many U.S. adults currently have some form of the disease. It ranges from simple gum inflammation, called gingivitis, to serious damage to the tissue and bone supporting the teeth.   In the worst cases, you can lose teeth. In gingivitis, the gums become red and swollen. They can bleed easily. Gingivitis is a mild form of gum disease. You can usually reverse it  with daily brushing and flossing and regular cleanings by a dentist or dental hygienist. Untreated gingivitis can lead to periodontitis. If you have periodontitis, the gums pull away from the teeth and form pockets that  become infected. If not treated, the bones, gums and connective tissue that support the teeth are destroyed. NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

What is head and neck cancer? Head and neck cancer is the name for cancers that develop in the mouth , nose and sinuses , salivary glands , and throat and voice box (larynx). Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell cancers . They begin in the moist tissues that line the head and neck. The cancer cells may spread into deeper tissue as the cancer grows. There are other cancers that develop in the head and neck, such as brain cancer , eye cancer , and esophageal cancer . But they are usually not considered to be head and neck cancers, because those types of cancer and their treatments are different. Who is more likely to develop head and neck cancer? Anyone can get head and neck cancer, but you are more likely to develop it if you: Use tobacco or drink lots of alcohol. Your risk of developing head and neck cancer is even higher if you do both. Are male. Are over age 50. Have a history of head or neck cancer. Have HPV (for cancers in the tonsils and base of the tongue). Are exposed to wood dusts or certain other toxic substances at work (for upper throat, nose, and sinus cancers). Have had radiation exposure to the head and neck (for salivary gland cancer). Have Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection (for upper throat and salivary gland cancers). Are Asian (for upper throat cancer). What are the symptoms of head and neck cancer? The symptoms of head and neck cancer may include: A lump in the neck A sore in the mouth or the throat that does not heal and may be painful A sore throat that does not go away Trouble swallowing A change or hoarseness in the voice Other possible symptoms can depend on the specific type of head and neck cancer. How is head and neck cancer diagnosed? Which exams and tests used to diagnose head and neck cancer can depend on the specific type of cancer. Possible exams and tests may include: A physical exam of the area that might have cancer. Blood and/or urine tests. An endoscopy . A biopsy or other procedure to collect cells from the area that might have cancer. The cells are viewed under a microscope to find out if they are abnormal. Imaging tests . What are the treatments for head and neck cancer? The treatment for head and neck cancer will depend on the specific type of cancer, the stage (how advanced the cancer is), your overall health, and other factors. The treatment options might include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Cancer immunotherapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells In some cases, you may need a combination of treatments. Sometimes surgery can affect how well you can chew, swallow, or talk. Rehabilitation, such as physical therapy, dietary counseling, and speech therapy, may help. Can head and neck cancer be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent head and neck cancer: Not smoking Limiting alcohol use or not drinking at all Getting regular dental exams Talking to your provider about HPV vaccination NIH: National Cancer Institute

Herpes is an infection that is caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). Oral herpes causes cold sores around the mouth or face. Genital herpes affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area.  Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection (STI). It affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area. Other herpes infections can affect the eyes, skin, or other parts of the body. The virus can be dangerous in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems. There are two types of HSV: HSV type 1 most commonly causes cold sores. It can also cause genital herpes. HSV type 2 is the usual cause of genital herpes, but it also can infect the mouth. HSV spreads through direct contact. Some people have no symptoms. Others get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. They turn into blisters, become itchy and painful, and then heal. Most people have outbreaks several times a year. Over time, you get them less often. Medicines to help your body fight the virus can help lessen symptoms and decrease outbreaks.

Your jaw is a set of bones that holds your teeth. It includes: The maxilla, which is the upper part of your jaw. It holds your top teeth in place and doesn't move. It also supports the muscles involved in chewing and facial expressions. The mandible, which is the lower part of your jaw. You move it when you talk or chew. It also holds your lower teeth in place. The temporomandibular joints (TMJs), which are two joints (one on each side) that connect your mandible to your skull. Jaw problems can include: Fractures (broken bones). Dislocations , which are joint injuries that force the ends of your bones out of position. Temporomandibular disorders (TMDs), which are conditions that affect your TMJs. Osteonecrosis , which happens when the blood flow to part of your bone is disrupted. It can cause the bone to break down. Jaw tumors, which can be benign (not cancer) or cancer. Jaw defects, which are birth defects in which your jaw could be missing or deformed. Diagnostic imaging tests are often used to diagnose jaw injuries and disorders. Your treatment will depend on which jaw problem you have.

Your mouth is one of the most important parts of your body. It has many different functions. It allows you to: Take in food and drink Breathe in air Start digestion, with your teeth chewing the food you eat and your salivary glands releasing saliva to help break down the food Speak and sing Show emotion, by smiling or pouting Any problem that affects your mouth can make it hard to eat, drink, or even smile. Some common mouth problems include: Cold sores -  painful sores on the lips and around the mouth, caused by a virus Canker sores - painful sores in the mouth, caused by bacteria or viruses Thrush -  a yeast infection that causes white patches in your mouth Leukoplakia - white patches of excess cell growth on the cheeks, gums or tongue, common in smokers Dry mouth - a lack of enough saliva, caused by some medicines and certain diseases Gum or tooth problems Bad breath Treatment for mouth disorders varies, depending on the problem. If a mouth problem is caused by some other disease, treating that disease can help. It is also important to keep your mouth clean and healthy by brushing, flossing, and not using tobacco.

What is oral cancer? Oral cancer is cancer of the mouth. It is a type of head and neck cancer . Most oral cancers are squamous cell cancers . They begin in the flat cells that cover the surfaces of your mouth, tongue, and lips. The cancer cells may spread into deeper tissue as the cancer grows. Most oral cancers are related to tobacco use, heavy alcohol use, or an HPV infection . Who is more likely to develop oral cancer? Anyone can get oral cancer, but you are more likely to develop it if you: Use tobacco or drink lots of alcohol. Your risk of developing oral cancer is even higher if you do both. Are male. Are over ago 40. Have HPV. Have a history of head or neck cancer. Get frequent sun exposure (for lip cancer). What are the symptoms of oral cancer? The symptoms of oral cancer may include: A white or red patch in your mouth A lip or mouth sore that won't heal Bleeding, pain, or numbness in the lip or mouth Loose teeth or dentures that no longer fit well Problems or pain with swallowing A lump in your neck Ear pain Trouble moving your mouth or jaw Swelling of the jaw A sore throat or feeling that something is caught in the throat If you have any of these symptoms for more than two weeks, see your health care provider or dentist. Oral cancer can spread quickly, so it's important to find it early. How is oral cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have oral cancer, your provider may use: A physical exam of the lips and mouth. An endoscopy . A biopsy or other procedure to collect cells from the lip or oral cavity. The cells are viewed under a microscope to find out if they are abnormal. Imaging tests . What are the treatments for oral cancer? The treatments for oral cancer include surgery, radiation therapy , or both. After surgery, some people also need chemotherapy to kill any cancer cells that are left. Can oral cancer be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent oral cancer: Not smoking Limiting alcohol use or not drinking at all Getting regular dental exams NIH: National Cancer Institute

Some people have naturally straight teeth that fit together. But if you have problems with your bite or the spacing of your teeth, you may need orthodontic care. Orthodontia is the branch of dentistry that deals with abnormalities of the teeth and jaw. Orthodontic care involves the use of devices, such as braces, to: Straighten teeth Correct problems with bite Close gaps between teeth Align lips and teeth properly Most people who receive orthodontic care are kids, but adults get braces, too. In young children, orthodontic treatment may guide proper jaw growth. This can help permanent teeth to come in properly.  Straight permanent teeth can help prevent tooth problems later on.

Piercings and tattoos are body decorations that go back to ancient times. Body piercing involves making a hole in the skin so that you can insert jewelry. This is often in the earlobe, but can be in other parts of the body. Tattoos are designs on the skin made with needles and colored ink. A permanent tattoo is meant to last forever. Permanent makeup is a type of tattoo. The health risks of piercings and tattoos include: Allergic reactions Keloids, a type of scar that forms during healing Infections, such as hepatitis To reduce the risks, make sure that the facility is clean, safe and has a good reputation. Proper sterilization of the equipment is important. Be sure to follow the instructions on caring for your skin. Holes from piercing usually close up if you no longer wear the jewelry. It is possible to remove tattoos, but it's painful and can cause scarring.

Many people who chew tobacco or dip snuff think it's safer than smoking . But you don't have to smoke tobacco for it to be dangerous. Chewing or dipping carries risks like: Cancer of the mouth Decay of exposed tooth roots Pulling away of the gums from the teeth White patches or red sores in the mouth that can turn to cancer Recent research shows the dangers of smokeless tobacco may go beyond the mouth. It might also play a role in other cancers, heart disease and stroke. Smokeless tobacco contains more nicotine than cigarettes. Nicotine is a highly addictive drug that makes it hard to stop using tobacco once you start. Having a quit date and a quitting plan can help you stop successfully. NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

Snoring is the sound you make when your breathing is blocked while you are asleep.  The sound is caused by tissues at the top of your airway that strike each other and vibrate. Snoring is common, especially among older people and people who are overweight. When severe, snoring can cause frequent awakenings at night and daytime sleepiness. It can disrupt your bed partner's sleep. Snoring can also be a sign of a serious sleep disorder called sleep apnea .  You should see your health care provider if you are often tired during the day, don't feel that you sleep well, or wake up gasping. To reduce snoring: Lose weight if you are overweight. It may help, but thin people can snore, too. Cut down or avoid alcohol and other sedatives at bedtime Don't sleep flat on your back NIH: National Institute on Aging

Our senses of taste and smell give us great pleasure. Taste helps us enjoy food and beverages. Smell lets us enjoy the scents and fragrances like roses or coffee. Taste and smell also protect us, letting us know when food has gone bad or when there is a gas leak. They make us want to eat, ensuring we get the nutrition we need. People with taste disorders may taste things that aren't there, may not be able to tell the difference in tastes, or can't taste at all. People with smell disorders may lose their sense of smell, or things may smell different.  A smell they once enjoyed may now smell bad to them. Many illnesses and injuries can cause taste and smell disorders, including colds and head injuries. Some drugs can also affect taste and smell. Most people lose some ability to taste and smell as they get older. Treatment varies, depending on the problem and its cause. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Your tongue helps you taste, swallow, and chew. You also use it to speak.  Your tongue is made up of many muscles. The upper surface contains your taste buds. Problems with the tongue include: Pain Swelling Changes in color or texture Abnormal movement or difficulty moving the tongue Taste problems These problems can have many different causes. Treatment depends on the underlying problem.

What are tonsils? Tonsils are lumps of tissue at the back of the throat. There are two of them, one on each side. Along with the adenoids , tonsils are part of the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system clears away infection and keeps body fluids in balance.  Tonsils and adenoids work by trapping the germs coming in through the mouth and nose. What is tonsillitis? Tonsillitis is an inflammation (swelling) of the tonsils. Sometimes along with tonsillitis, the adenoids are also swollen. What causes tonsillitis? The cause of tonsillitis is usually a viral infection. Bacterial infections such as strep throat can also cause tonsillitis. Who is at risk for tonsillitis? Tonsillitis is most common in children over age two. Almost every child in the United States gets it at least once. Tonsillitis caused by bacteria is more common in kids ages 5-15. Tonsillitis caused by a virus is more common in younger children. Adults can get tonsillitis, but it is not very common. Is tonsillitis contagious? Although tonsillitis is not contagious, the viruses and bacteria that cause it are contagious. Frequent handwashing can help prevent spreading or catching the infections. What are the symptoms of tonsillitis? The symptoms of tonsillitis include: A sore throat , which may be severe Red, swollen tonsils Trouble swallowing A white or yellow coating on the tonsils Swollen glands in the neck Fever Bad breath When does my child need to see a health care provider for tonsillitis? You should call your health care provider if your child: Has a sore throat for more than two days Has trouble or pain when swallowing Feels very sick or very weak You should get emergency care right away if your child: Has trouble breathing Starts drooling Has a lot of trouble swallowing How is tonsillitis diagnosed? To diagnose tonsillitis, your child's health care provider will first ask you about your child's symptoms and medical history. The provider will look at your child's throat and neck, checking for things such as redness or white spots on the tonsils and swollen lymph nodes. Your child will probably also have one or more tests to check for strep throat, since it can cause tonsillitis and it requires treatment. It could be a rapid strep test, a throat culture, or both. For both tests, the provider uses a cotton swab to collect a sample of fluids from your child's tonsils and the back of the throat. With the rapid strep test, testing is done in the office, and you get the results within minutes. The throat culture is done in a lab, and it usually takes a few days to get the results. The throat culture is a more reliable test. So sometimes if the rapid strep test is negative (meaning that it does not show any strep bacteria), the provider will also do a throat culture just to make sure that your child does not have strep. What are the treatments for tonsillitis? Treatment for tonsillitis depends on the cause. If the cause is a virus, there is no medicine to treat it. If the cause is a bacterial infection, such as strep throat, your child will need to take antibiotics . It is important for your child to finish the antibiotics even if he or she feels better. If treatment stops too soon, some bacteria may survive and re-infect your child. No matter what is causing the tonsillitis, there are some things you can do to help your child feel better. Make sure that your child: Gets a lot of rest Drinks plenty of fluids Tries eating soft foods if it hurts to swallow Tries eating warm liquids or cold foods like popsicles to soothe the throat Isn't around cigarette smoke or do anything else that could irritate the throat Sleeps in a room with a humidifier Gargles with saltwater Sucks on a lozenge (but do not give them to children under four; they can choke on them) Takes an over-the-counter pain reliever such as acetaminophen. Children and teenagers should not take aspirin. In some cases, your child may need a tonsillectomy. What is a tonsillectomy and why might my child need one? A tonsillectomy is surgery to remove the tonsils. Your child might need it if he or she: Keeps getting tonsillitis Has bacterial tonsillitis that does not get better with antibiotics Has tonsils are too big, and are causing trouble breathing or swallowing Your child usually gets the surgery and goes home later that day. Very young children and people who have complications may need to stay in the hospital overnight. It can take a week or two before your child completely recovers from the surgery.

What is tooth decay? Tooth decay is damage to a tooth's surface, or enamel. It happens when bacteria in your mouth make acids that attack the enamel. Tooth decay can lead to cavities (dental caries), which are holes in your teeth. If tooth decay is not treated, it can cause pain, infection, and even tooth loss. What causes tooth decay? Our mouths are full of bacteria. Some bacteria are helpful. But some can be harmful, including the ones that play a role in tooth decay. These bacteria combine with food to form a soft, sticky film called plaque. The bacteria in plaque use the sugar and starch in what you eat and drink to make acids. The acids begin to eat away at the minerals on your enamel. Over time, the plaque can harden into tartar. Besides damaging your teeth, plaque and tartar can also irritate your gums and cause gum disease . You get fluoride from toothpaste, water, and other sources. This fluoride, along with your salvia, helps the enamel repair itself by replacing the minerals. Your teeth go through this natural process of losing minerals and regaining minerals all day long. But if you don't take care of your teeth and/or you eat and drink lots of sugary or starchy things, your enamel will keep losing minerals. This leads to tooth decay. A white spot may appear where minerals have been lost. This is an early sign of tooth decay. You may be able to stop or reverse the decay at this point. Your enamel can still repair itself, if you take better care of your teeth and limit sugary/starchy foods and drinks. But if the tooth decay process continues, more minerals are lost. Over time, the enamel is weakened and destroyed, forming a cavity. A cavity is a hole in your tooth. It is permanent damage that a dentist has to repair with a filling. Who is at risk for tooth decay? The main risk factors for tooth decay are not taking care of your teeth and having too many sugary or starchy foods and drinks. Some people have a higher risk of tooth decay, including people who: Don't have enough saliva, because of medicines, certain diseases, or some cancer treatments Don't get enough fluoride Are very young. Babies and toddlers who drink from bottles are at risk, especially if they are given juice or get bottles at bedtime. This exposes their teeth to sugars for long periods of time. Are older. Many older adults have receding gums and more wear on their teeth. These raise the risk of decay on the exposed root surfaces of their teeth. What are the symptoms of tooth decay and cavities? In early tooth decay, you usually don't have symptoms. As tooth decay gets worse, it can cause: A toothache (tooth pain) Tooth sensitivity to sweets, hot, or cold White or brown stains on the surface of a tooth A cavity An infection, which can lead to an abscess (pocket of pus) forming. The abscess can cause pain, facial swelling, and fever. How are tooth decay and cavities diagnosed? Dentists usually find tooth decay and cavities by looking at your teeth and probing them with dental instruments. Your dentist will also ask if you have any symptoms. Sometimes you may need a dental x-ray. What are the treatments for tooth decay and cavities? There are several treatments for tooth decay and cavities. Which treatment you get depends on how bad the problem is: Fluoride treatments. If you have early tooth decay, a fluoride treatment can help the enamel to repair itself. Fillings. If you have a typical cavity, your dentist will remove the decayed tooth tissue and then restore the tooth by filling it with a filling material. Root canal. If the damage to the tooth and/or an infection spreads to the pulp (inside of the tooth), you might need a root canal. Your dentist will remove the decayed pulp and clean inside the tooth and root. The next step is to fill the tooth with a temporary filling. Then you will need to come back to get a permanent filling or a crown (a cover on the tooth). Extraction (pulling the tooth). In the most severe cases, when the damage to the pulp cannot be fixed, your dentist may pull the tooth. Your dentist will suggest that you get a bridge or implant to replace the missing tooth. Otherwise, the teeth next to the gap may move over and change your bite. Can tooth decay be prevented? There are steps that you can take to prevent tooth decay: Make sure that you get enough fluoride by Brushing with a fluoride toothpaste Drinking tap water with fluoride. Most bottled water does not contain fluoride. Using fluoride mouth rinse Practice good oral health by brushing your teeth twice a day with a fluoride toothpaste and regularly flossing your teeth Make smart food choices by limiting foods and drinks that are high in sugars and starches. Eat nutritious, balanced meals and limit snacking. Do not use tobacco products, including smokeless tobacco . If you currently use tobacco, consider quitting . See a dentist for regular check-ups and professional cleanings Make sure that your children get sealants on their teeth. Dental sealants are thin plastic coatings that protect the chewing surfaces of the back teeth. Children should get sealants on their back teeth as soon as they come in, before decay can attack the teeth. NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

What are teeth? Your teeth are made of a hard, bonelike material. There are four parts: Enamel, your tooth's hard surface Dentin, the hard yellow part under the enamel Cementum, the hard tissue that covers the root and keeps your teeth in place Pulp, the soft connective tissue in the center of your tooth. It contains nerves and blood vessels. You need your teeth for many activities that you may take for granted. These include eating, speaking and even smiling. What are tooth disorders? There are many different problems that can affect your teeth, including: Tooth decay - damage to a tooth's surface, which can lead to cavities Abscess - a pocket of pus, caused by a tooth infection Impacted tooth - a tooth did not erupt (break through the gum) when it should have. It is usually wisdom teeth that are impacted, but it can sometimes happen to other teeth. Misaligned teeth (malocclusion) Tooth injuries such as broken or chipped teeth What causes tooth disorders? The causes of tooth disorders varies, depending on the problem. Sometimes the cause is not taking good care of your teeth. In other cases, you may have been born with the problem or the cause is an accident. What are the symptoms of tooth disorders? The symptoms can vary, depending on the problem. Some of the more common symptoms include: Abnormal color or shape of the tooth Tooth pain Worn-down teeth How are tooth disorders diagnosed? Your dentist will ask about your symptoms, look at your teeth, and probe them with dental instruments. In some cases, you may need dental x-rays. What are the treatments for tooth disorders? The treatment will depend on the problem. Some common treatments are: Fillings for cavities Root canals for cavities or infections that affect the pulp (inside of the tooth) Extractions (pulling teeth) for teeth that are impacted and causing problems or are too damaged to be fixed. You may also have a tooth or teeth pulled because of overcrowding in your mouth. Can tooth disorders be prevented? The main thing that you can do to prevent tooth disorders is to take good care of your teeth : Brush your teeth twice a day with a fluoride toothpaste Clean between your teeth every day with floss or another type of between-the-teeth cleaner Limit sugary snacks and drinks Don't smoke or chew tobacco See your dentist or oral health professional regularly

Candida is the scientific name for yeast. It is a fungus that lives almost everywhere, including in your body. Usually, your immune system keeps yeast under control. If you are sick or taking antibiotics, it can multiply and cause an infection. Yeast infections affect different parts of the body in different ways: Thrush is a yeast infection that causes white patches in your mouth Candida esophagitis is thrush that spreads to your esophagus, the tube that takes food from your mouth to your stomach. It can make it hard or painful to swallow. Women can get vaginal yeast infections, causing vaginitis Yeast infections of the skin cause itching and rashes Yeast infections in your bloodstream can be life-threatening Antifungal medicines get rid of yeast infections in most people. If you have a weak immune system, treatment might be more difficult.

Acne is a common skin disease that causes pimples. Pimples form when hair follicles 
under your skin clog up. Most pimples form on the face, neck, back, chest, and shoulders. Anyone can get acne, but 
it is common in teenagers and young adults. It is not serious, but it can cause scars . No one knows exactly what causes acne. Hormone changes, such as those during the teenage 
years and pregnancy, probably play a role. There are many myths about what causes acne. Chocolate and greasy foods are often 
blamed, but there is little evidence that foods have much effect on acne in most people. 
Another common myth is that dirty skin causes acne; however, blackheads and pimples are not 
caused by dirt. Stress doesn't cause acne, but stress can make it worse. If you have acne: Clean your skin gently Try not to touch your skin Avoid the sun Treatments for acne include medicines and creams. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases

Athlete's foot is a common infection caused by a fungus.  It most often affects the space between the toes. Symptoms include itching, burning, and cracked, scaly skin between your toes. You can get athlete's foot from damp surfaces, such as showers, swimming pools, and locker room floors. To prevent it: Keep your feet clean, dry, and cool Wear clean socks Don't walk barefoot in public areas Wear flip-flops in locker room showers Keep your toenails clean and clipped short Treatments include over-the-counter antifungal creams for most cases and prescription medicines for more serious infections. These usually clear up the infection, but it can come back. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Birthmarks are abnormalities of the skin that are present when a baby is born. There are two types of birthmarks. Vascular birthmarks are made up of blood vessels that haven't formed correctly. They are usually red. Two types of vascular birthmarks are hemangiomas and port-wine stains. Pigmented birthmarks are made of a cluster of pigment cells which cause color in skin. They can be many different colors, from tan to brown, gray to black, or even blue. Moles can be birthmarks. No one knows what causes many types of birthmarks, but some run in families. Your baby's doctor will look at the birthmark to see if it needs any treatment or if it should be watched. Pigmented birthmarks aren't usually treated, except for moles. Treatment for vascular birthmarks includes laser surgery. Most birthmarks are not serious, and some go away on their own. Some stay the same or get worse as you get older. Usually birthmarks are only a concern for your appearance. But certain types can increase your risk of skin cancer. If your birthmark bleeds, hurts, itches, or becomes infected, call your health care provider.

What are blisters? Blisters are fluid-filled sacs on the outer layer of your skin. They form because of rubbing, heat, or diseases of the skin. They are most common on your hands and feet. Other names for blisters are vesicles (usually for smaller blisters) and bulla (for larger blisters). What causes blisters? Blisters often happen when there is friction - rubbing or pressure - on one spot. For example, if your shoes don't fit quite right and they keep rubbing part of your foot. Or if you don't wear gloves when you rake leaves and the handle keeps rubbing against your hand. Other causes of blisters include: Burns Sunburn Frostbite Eczema Allergic reactions Poison ivy, oak, and sumac Autoimmune diseases such as pemphigus Epidermolysis bullosa, an illness that causes the skin to be fragile Viral infections such as varicella zoster (which causes chickenpox and shingles ) and herpes simplex (which causes cold sores ) Skin infections including impetigo What are the treatments for blisters? Blisters will usually heal on their own. The skin over the blister helps keep out infections. You can put a bandage on the blister to keep it clean.  Make sure that there is no more rubbing or friction on the blister. You should contact your health care provider if: The blister looks infected - if it is draining pus, or the area around the blister is red, swollen, warm, or very painful You have a fever You have several blisters, especially if you cannot figure out what is causing them You have health problems such as circulation problems or diabetes Normally you don't want to drain a blister, because of the risk of infection. But if a blister is large, painful, or looks like it will pop on its own, you can drain the fluid. Can blisters be prevented? There are some things you can do to prevent friction blisters: Make sure that your shoes fit properly Always wear socks with your shoes, and make sure that the socks fit well. You may want to wear socks that are acrylic or nylon, so they keep moisture away from your feet. Wear gloves or protective gear on your hands when you use any tools or sports equipment that cause friction.

A bruise is a mark on your skin caused by blood trapped under the surface. It happens when an injury crushes small blood vessels but does not break the skin. Those vessels break open and leak blood under the skin. Bruises are often painful and swollen. You can get skin, muscle and bone bruises. Bone bruises are the most serious. It can take months for a bruise to fade, but most last about two weeks. They start off a reddish color, and then turn bluish-purple and greenish-yellow before returning to normal. To reduce bruising, ice the injured area and elevate it above your heart. See your health care provider if you seem to bruise for no reason, or if the bruise appears to be infected.

A burn is damage to your body's tissues caused by heat, chemicals, electricity , sunlight , or radiation . Scalds from hot liquids and steam, building fires and flammable liquids and gases are the most common causes of burns. Another kind is an inhalation injury , caused by breathing smoke. There are three types of burns: First-degree burns damage only the outer layer of skin Second-degree burns damage the outer layer and the layer underneath Third-degree burns damage or destroy the deepest layer of skin and tissues underneath Burns can cause swelling, blistering, scarring and, in serious cases, shock , and even death. They also can lead to infections because they damage your skin's protective barrier. Treatment for burns depends on the cause of the burn, how deep it is, and how much of the body it covers. Antibiotic creams can prevent or treat infections.  For more serious burns, treatment may be needed to clean the wound, replace the skin, and make sure the patient has enough fluids and nutrition. NIH: National Institute of General Medical Sciences

Cellulitis is an infection of the skin and deep underlying tissues. Group A strep ( streptococcal ) bacteria are the most common cause.  The bacteria enter your body when you get an injury such as a bruise, burn, surgical cut, or wound. Symptoms include: Fever and chills Swollen glands or lymph nodes A rash with painful, red, tender skin. The skin may blister and scab over. Your health care provider may take a sample or culture from your skin or do a blood test to identify the bacteria causing infection. Treatment is with antibiotics. They may be oral in mild cases, or intravenous (by IV) for more severe cases.

Chickenpox is an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus. Most cases are in children under age 15, but older children and adults can get it.  It spreads very easily from one person to another. The classic symptom of chickenpox is an uncomfortable, itchy rash. The rash turns into fluid-filled blisters and eventually into scabs. It usually shows up on the face, chest, and back and then spreads to the rest of the body. Other symptoms include: Fever Headache Tiredness Loss of appetite Chickenpox is usually mild and lasts 5 to 10 days. Calamine lotions and oatmeal baths can help with itching. Acetaminophen can treat the fever. Do not use aspirin for chickenpox; that combination can cause Reye syndrome . Chickenpox can sometimes cause serious problems. Adults, babies, teenagers, pregnant women, and those with weak immune systems tend to get sicker from it. They may need to take antiviral medicines. Once you catch chickenpox, the virus usually stays in your body.  You probably will not get chickenpox again, but the virus can cause shingles in adults. A chickenpox vaccine can help prevent most cases of chickenpox, or make it less severe if you do get it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Corns and calluses are caused by pressure or friction on your skin. They often appear on feet where the bony parts of your feet rub against your shoes. Corns usually appear on the tops or sides of toes while calluses form on the soles of feet. Calluses also can appear on hands or other areas that are rubbed or pressed. Wearing shoes that fit better or using non-medicated pads may help. While bathing, gently rub the corn or callus with a washcloth or pumice stone to help reduce the size. To avoid infection, do not try to shave off the corn or callus. See your doctor, especially if you have diabetes or circulation problems. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Your scalp is the skin on the top of your head. Unless you have hair loss , hair grows on your scalp. Different skin problems can affect your scalp. Dandruff is a flaking of the skin. The flakes are yellow or white. Dandruff may make your scalp feel itchy. It usually starts after puberty, and is more common in men. Dandruff is usually a symptom of seborrheic dermatitis, or seborrhea. It is a skin condition that can also cause redness and irritation of the skin. Most of the time, using a dandruff shampoo can help control your dandruff. If that does not work, contact your health care provider. There is a type of seborrheic dermatitis that babies can get. It is called cradle cap. It usually lasts a few months, and then goes away on its own. Besides the scalp, it can sometimes affect other parts of the body, such as the eyelids, armpits, groin, and ears. Normally, washing your baby's hair every day with a mild shampoo and gently rubbing their scalp with your fingers or a soft brush can help. For severe cases, your health care provider may give you a prescription shampoo or cream to use. Other problems that can affect the scalp include: Scalp ringworm , a fungal infection that causes itchy, red patches on your head. It can also leave bald spots. It usually affects children. Scalp psoriasis , which causes itchy or sore patches of thick, red skin with silvery scales. About half of the people with psoriasis have it on their scalp.

Eczema is a term for several different types of skin swelling. Eczema is also called dermatitis. Most types cause dry, itchy skin and rashes on the face, inside the elbows and behind the knees, and on the hands and feet. Scratching the skin can cause it to turn red, and to swell and itch even more. Eczema is not contagious. The cause of eczema is unknown. It is likely caused by both genetic and environmental factors. Eczema may get better or worse over time, but it is often a long-lasting disease. People who have it may also develop hay fever and asthma. The most common type of eczema is atopic dermatitis. It is most common in babies and children, but adults can have it too. As children who have atopic dermatitis grow older, this problem may get better or go away. But sometimes the skin may stay dry and get irritated easily. Treatments may include medicines, skin creams, light therapy, and good skin care. You can prevent some types of eczema by avoiding: Things that irritate your skin, such as certain soaps, fabrics, and lotions Stress Things you are allergic to, such as food, pollen, and animals NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is fifth disease? Fifth disease, also called erythema infectiosum, is a viral infection caused by parvovirus B19. This virus only infects people; it's not the same type of parvovirus that dogs and cats can get. Fifth disease mostly affects children. It often causes a bright red rash on their cheeks (sometimes called a "slapped cheek" rash). In the United States, parvovirus B19 infections are more common in late winter, spring, and early summer. There are usually minor outbreaks of fifth disease about every 3 to 4 years. What causes fifth disease? Parvovirus B19, which causes fifth disease, can spread from person to person: Through respiratory droplets, such as saliva (spit), sputum, or nasal mucus. The droplets can spread when: Someone who has the virus coughs and sneezes You touch an item that has the virus on it Through blood or blood products From a pregnant parent to the baby during pregnancy You are most contagious early in your infection, when you usually only have a fever or cold-like symptoms. You are not likely to be contagious after you get later symptoms such as a rash and joint pain. What are the symptoms of fifth disease? About 2 out of 10 people who get a B19 parvovirus infection will have no symptoms. But most people will get the symptoms of fifth disease, which are usually mild and can include: Fever Headache Cough Sore throat Rashes Joint pain The "slapped cheek" rash is more common in children. They usually get the rash a few days after they first have other symptoms. The rash can then spread to the arms, legs, chest, back, and buttocks. Adults who get fifth disease might also have joint pain and swelling (called polyarthropathy syndrome). Sometimes the infection can cause serious health complications affecting the nerves, joints, or blood system. This is more likely to happen if you are pregnant, have a blood disorder such as anemia , or a weakened immune system . Because of these risks to you and some possible risks to your baby, contact your health care provider if you are pregnant and: You show signs of fifth disease (or a "slapped cheek" rash) You may have been exposed to someone who has the infection How is fifth disease diagnosed? There is no routine lab test to diagnose fifth disease. Providers can often diagnose fifth disease just by seeing the "slapped cheek" rash and rashes on the body. There is testing to show whether or not you have protection (immunity) against the B19 parvovirus or if you have had a recent infection. This test is usually not needed, but your provider may order the test if you are pregnant or at higher risk for complications of the disease. What are the treatments for fifth disease? There is no specific treatment for fifth disease. It is usually mild and goes away on its own. To feel better, get plenty of rest. Taking acetaminophen can help with the fever and pain. Do not give aspirin to children, because it may cause Reye syndrome . This is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. Can fifth disease be prevented? There is no vaccine to prevent fifth disease. But you can help protect yourself and others by: Washing your hands often with soap and water Covering your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze Avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Staying home when you are sick Most people become immune to the virus after having it once. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

If you have ever had athlete's foot or a yeast infection , you can blame a fungus. A fungus is a primitive organism. Mushrooms, mold and mildew are examples. Fungi live in air, in soil, on plants and in water. Some live in the human body. Only about half of all types of fungi are harmful. Some fungi reproduce through tiny spores in the air. You can inhale the spores or they can land on you. As a result, fungal infections often start in the lungs or on the skin. You are more likely to get a fungal infection if you have a weakened immune system or take antibiotics. Fungi can be difficult to kill. For skin and nail infections, you can apply medicine directly to the infected area. Oral antifungal medicines are also available for serious infections.

You lose up to 100 hairs from your scalp every day. That's normal, and in most people, those hairs grow back. But many men -- and some women -- lose hair as they grow older. You can also lose your hair if you have certain diseases, such as thyroid problems, diabetes, or lupus. If you take certain medicines or have chemotherapy for cancer, you may also lose your hair. Other causes are stress, a low protein diet, a family history, or poor nutrition. Treatment for hair loss depends on the cause. In some cases, treating the underlying cause will correct the problem. Other treatments include medicines and hair restoration.

The average person has 5 million hairs. Hair grows all over your body except on your lips, palms, and the soles of your feet. It takes about a month for healthy hair to grow half an inch. Most hairs grow for up to six years and then fall out. New hairs grow in their place. Hair helps keep you warm. It also protects your eyes, ears and nose from small particles in the air. Common problem with the hair and scalp include hair loss , infections, and flaking .

What are head lice? Head lice are tiny insects that live on people's heads. Adult lice are about the size of sesame seeds. The eggs, called nits, are even smaller - about the size of a dandruff flake. Lice and nits are found on or near the scalp, most often at the neckline and behind the ears. Head lice are parasites, and they need to feed on human blood to survive. They are one of the three types of lice that live on humans. The other two types are body lice and pubic lice . Each type of lice is different, and getting one type does not mean that you will get another type. How do head lice spread? Lice move by crawling, because they cannot hop or fly. They spread by close person-to-person contact. Rarely, they can spread through sharing personal belongings such as hats or hairbrushes. Personal hygiene and cleanliness have nothing to do with getting head lice. You also cannot get pubic lice from animals. Head lice do not spread disease. Who is at risk for head lice? Children ages 3-11 and their families get head lice most often. This is because young children often have head-to-head contact while playing together. What are the symptoms of head lice? The symptoms of head lice include: Tickling feeling in the hair Frequent itching, which is caused by an allergic reaction to the bites Sores from scratching. Sometimes the sores can become infected with bacteria. Trouble sleeping, because head lice are most active in the dark How do you know if you have head lice? A diagnosis of head lice usually comes from seeing a louse or nit. Because they are very small and move quickly, you may need to use a magnifying lens and a fine-toothed comb to find lice or nits. What are the treatments for head lice? Treatments for head lice include both over-the-counter and prescription shampoos, creams, and lotions. If you want to use an over-the-counter treatment and you aren't sure which one to use or how to use one, ask your health care provider or pharmacist. You should also check with your health care provider first if you are pregnant or nursing, or if you want to use a treatment on a young child. Follow these steps when using a head lice treatment: Apply the product according to the instructions. Only apply it to the scalp and the hair attached to the scalp. You should not use it on other body hair. Use only one product at a time, unless your health care provider tells you to use two different kinds at once Pay attention to what the instructions say about how long you should leave the medicine on the hair and on how you should rinse it out After rinsing, use a fine-toothed comb or special "nit comb" to remove dead lice and nits After each treatment, check your hair for lice and nits.  You should comb your hair to remove nits and lice every 2-3 days. Do this for 2-3 weeks to be sure that all lice and nits are gone. All household members and other close contacts should be checked and treated if necessary. If an over-the-counter treatment does not work for you, you can ask your health care provider for a prescription product. Can head lice be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent the spread of lice. If you already have lice, besides treatment, you should: Wash your clothes, bedding, and towels with hot water, and dry them using the hot cycle of the dryer Soak your combs and brushes in hot water for 5-10 minutes Vacuum the floor and furniture, particularly where you sat or lay If there are items that you cannot wash, seal them in a plastic bag for two weeks To prevent your children from spreading lice: Teach children to avoid head-to-head contact during play and other activities Teach children not to share clothing and other items that they put on their head, such as headphones, hair ties, and helmets If your child has lice, be sure to check the policies at school and/or daycare. Your child may not be able to go back until the lice have been completely treated. There is no clear scientific evidence that lice can be suffocated by home remedies, such as mayonnaise, olive oil, or similar substances. You also should not use kerosene or gasoline; they are dangerous and flammable. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Hives are red and sometimes itchy bumps on your skin. An allergic reaction to a drug or food usually causes them. Allergic reactions cause your body to release chemicals that can make your skin swell up in hives. People who have other allergies are more likely to get hives than other people.  Other causes include infections  and stress. Hives are very common.  They usually go away on their own, but if you have a serious case, you might need medicine or a shot. In rare cases, hives can cause a dangerous swelling in your airways, making it hard to breathe - which is a medical emergency.

Impetigo is a skin infection caused by bacteria. It is usually caused by staphylococcal (staph) bacteria, but it can also be caused by streptococcal (strep) bacteria. It is most common in children between the ages of two and six. It usually starts when bacteria get into a break in the skin, such as a cut, scratch, or insect bite. Symptoms start with red or pimple-like sores surrounded by red skin. These sores can be anywhere, but usually they occur on your face, arms and legs. The sores fill with pus, then break open after a few days and form a thick crust. They are often itchy, but scratching them can spread the sores. Impetigo can spread by contact with sores or nasal discharge from an infected person. You can treat impetigo with antibiotics.

Most insect bites are harmless, though they sometimes cause discomfort. Bee, wasp, and hornet stings and fire ant bites usually hurt. Mosquito and flea bites usually itch. Insects can also spread diseases. In the United States, some mosquitoes spread West Nile virus . Travelers outside the United States may be at risk for malaria and other infections. To prevent insect bites and their complications: Don't bother insects Use insect repellant Wear protective clothing Be careful when you eat outside because food attracts insects If you know you have severe allergic reactions to insect bites and stings (such as anaphylaxis ), carry an emergency epinephrine kit

What is itching? Itching is an irritating sensation that makes you want to scratch your skin. Sometimes it can feel like pain, but it is different. Often, you feel itchy in one area in your body, but sometimes you may feel itching all over. Along with the itching, you may also have a rash or hives . What causes itching? Itching is a symptom of many health conditions. Some common causes are: Allergic reactions to food , insect bites , pollen , and medicines Skin conditions such as eczema , psoriasis , and dry skin Irritating chemicals, cosmetics , and other substances Parasites such as pinworms , scabies , head and body lice Pregnancy Liver , kidney , or thyroid diseases Certain cancers or cancer treatments Diseases that can affect the nervous system, such as diabetes and shingles What are the treatments for itching? Most itching is not serious. To feel better, you could try: Applying cold compresses Using moisturizing lotions Taking lukewarm or oatmeal baths Using over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream or antihistamines Avoiding scratching, wearing irritating fabrics, and exposure to high heat and humidity Contact your health care provider if your itching is severe, does not go away after a few weeks, or does not have an apparent cause. You may need other treatments, such as medicines or light therapy. If you have an underlying disease that is causing the itching, treating that disease may help.

What is Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease is a rare illness that usually affects small children. Other names for the disease are Kawasaki syndrome and mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. It is a type of vasculitis , which is inflammation of the blood vessels. Kawasaki disease is serious, but most children can fully recover if they are treated right away. What causes Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease happens when the immune system injures the blood vessels by mistake. Researchers do not fully know why this happens. But when it does, the blood vessels become inflamed and can narrow or close off. Genetics may play a role in Kawasaki disease. There may also be environmental factors, such as infections. It does not seem to be contagious. This means that it cannot be passed from one child to another. Who is more likely to develop Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease usually affects children under the age of 5. But older children and adults can sometimes get it. It is more common in boys than girls. It can affect children of any race, but those with Asian or Pacific Islander descent are more likely to get it. What are the symptoms of Kawasaki disease? The symptoms of Kawasaki disease may include: High fever lasting at least five days A rash , often on the back, chest, and groin Swollen hands and feet Redness of the lips, lining of the mouth, tongue, palms of the hand, and soles of the feet Pink eye (conjunctivitis) Swollen lymph nodes in the neck Contact your child's health care provider if your child has a fever for 4 days, especially if they have any other symptoms of Kawasaki disease. What other problems can Kawasaki disease cause? Sometimes Kawasaki disease can affect the walls of the coronary arteries. These arteries bring blood and oxygen to your heart. This can lead to: An aneurysm (bulging and thinning of the walls of the arteries). This can raise the risk of blood clots in the arteries. If the blood clots are not treated, they could lead to a heart attack or internal bleeding. Inflammation in the heart. Heart valve problems . Kawasaki disease can also affect other parts of the body, including the brain and nervous system, the immune system, and the digestive system. How is Kawasaki disease diagnosed? There is no specific test for Kawasaki disease. To find out if your child has Kawasaki disease, your child's provider: Will do a physical exam, which includes looking at the signs and symptoms Will likely order blood and urine tests to rule out other diseases and check for signs of inflammation May order tests to check for damage to the heart, such as an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (EKG) What are the treatments for Kawasaki disease? Kawasaki disease is usually treated in the hospital with an intravenous (IV) dose of immunoglobulin (IVIG) antibodies. Antibodies are proteins that your immune system makes to fight infections. Aspirin may also be part of the treatment. But do not give your child aspirin unless the health care provider tells you to. Aspirin can cause Reye syndrome in children. This is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. Treatment usually works. But if it is not working well enough, the provider may also give your child other medicines to fight the inflammation. If the disease affects your child's heart, they might need additional medicines, surgery, or other medical procedures.

Leishmaniasis is a parasitic disease spread by the bite of infected sand flies. There are several different forms of leishmaniasis. The most common are cutaneous and visceral.  The cutaneous type causes skin sores. The visceral type affects internal organs such as the spleen, liver, and bone marrow. People with this form usually have fever, weight loss, and an enlarged spleen and liver. Leishmaniasis is found in parts of about 88 countries. Most of these countries are in the tropics and subtropics. It is possible but very unlikely that you would get this disease in the United States. But you should be aware of it if you are traveling to the Middle East or parts of Central America, South America, Asia, Africa or southern Europe. Treatment is with medicines that contain antimony, a type of metal, or with strong antibiotics. The best way to prevent the disease is to protect yourself from sand fly bites: Stay indoors from dusk to dawn, when sand flies are the most active Wear long pants and long-sleeved shirts when outside Use insect repellent and bed nets as needed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Melanoma is the most serious type of skin cancer .  Often the first sign of melanoma is a change in the size, shape, color, or feel of a mole. Most melanomas have a black or black-blue area. Melanoma may also appear as a new mole. It may be black, abnormal, or "ugly looking." Thinking of "ABCDE" can help you remember what to watch for: Asymmetry - the shape of one half does not match the other Border - the edges are ragged, blurred or irregular Color - the color is uneven and may include shades of black, brown and tan Diameter - there is a change in size, usually an increase Evolving - the mole has changed over the past few weeks or months Surgery is the first treatment of all stages of melanoma. Other treatments include chemotherapy and radiation, biologic, and targeted therapies.  Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. Targeted therapy uses substances that attack cancer cells without harming normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Moles are growths on the skin. They happen when pigment cells in the skin, called melanocytes, grow in clusters. Moles are very common. Most people have between 10 and 40 moles. A person may develop new moles from time to time, usually until about age 40. In older people, they tend to fade away. Moles are usually pink, tan or brown. They can be flat or raised. They are usually round or oval and no larger than a pencil eraser. About one out of every ten people has at least one unusual (or atypical) mole that looks different from an ordinary mole. They are called dysplastic nevi. They may be more likely than ordinary moles to develop into melanoma , a type of skin cancer. You should have a health care professional check your moles if they look unusual, grow larger, change in color or outline, or in any other way. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Mosquitoes are insects that live all over the world. There are thousands of different species of mosquitoes; about 200 of those live in the United States. Female mosquitoes bite animals and humans and drink a very small amount of their blood. They need protein and iron from blood to produce eggs. After drinking blood, they find some standing water and lay their eggs in it. The eggs hatch into larvae, then pupae, and then they become adult mosquitos. The males live for about a week to ten days, and the females can live up to several weeks. Some female mosquitoes can hibernate in the winter, and they can live for months. What health problems can mosquito bites cause? Most mosquito bites are harmless, but there are times when they can be dangerous. The ways that mosquito bites can affect humans include: Causing itchy bumps , as an immune system response to the mosquito's saliva. This is the most common reaction. The bumps usually go away after a day or two. Causing allergic reactions , including blisters, large hives, and in rare cases, anaphylaxis . Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that affects the whole body. It is a medical emergency. Spreading diseases to humans . Some of these diseases can be serious. Many of them do not have any treatments, and only a few have vaccines to prevent them. These diseases are more of a problem in Africa and other tropical areas of the world, but more of them are spreading to the United States. One factor is climate change , which makes the conditions in some parts of the United States more favorable to certain types of mosquitoes. Other reasons include increased trade with, and travel to, tropical and subtropical areas. Which diseases can mosquitoes spread? Common diseases spread by mosquitoes include: Chikungunya , a viral infection that causes symptoms such as fever and severe joint pain. The symptoms usually last about a week, but for some, the joint pain may last for months. Most cases of chikungunya in the United States are in people who traveled to other countries. There have been a few cases where it has spread in the United States. Dengue , a viral infection that causes a high fever, headaches, joint and muscle pain, vomiting, and a rash. Most people get better within a few weeks. In some cases, it can become very severe, even life-threatening. Dengue is rare in the United States. Malaria , a parasitic disease that causes serious symptoms such as high fevers, shaking chills, and flu-like illness. It can be life-threatening, but there are drugs to treat it. Malaria is a major health problem in many tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Almost all cases of malaria in the United States are in people who traveled to other countries. West Nile Virus (WNV), a viral infection that often has no symptoms. In those that do have symptoms, they are usually mild, and include fever, headache, and nausea. In rare cases, the virus can enter the brain, and it can be life-threatening. WNV has spread across the continental United States. Zika Virus , a viral infection that often does not cause symptoms. One in five infected people do get symptoms, which are usually mild. They include a fever, rash, joint pain, and pink eye. Besides being spread by mosquitoes, Zika can spread from mother to baby during pregnancy and cause serious birth defects. It can also spread from one partner to another during sex. There have been a few outbreaks of Zika in the southern United States. Can mosquito bites be prevented? Use an insect repellent when you go outdoors. Choose an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. They are evaluated to make sure they are safe and effective. Make sure that the repellant has one of these ingredients: DEET, picaridin, IR3535, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or para-menthane-diol. It is important to follow the instructions on the label. Cover up. Wear long sleeves, long pants, and socks when outdoors. Mosquitoes may bite through thin fabric, so spray thin clothes with an EPA-registered repellent like permethrin. Don't apply permethrin directly to skin. Mosquito-proof your home. Install or repair screens on windows and doors to keep mosquitoes out. Use air conditioning if you have it. Get rid of mosquito breeding sites. Regularly empty standing water from your house and yard. The water could be in flowerpots, gutters, buckets, pool covers, pet water dishes, discarded tires, or birdbaths. If you plan to travel, get information about the areas you will be going to. Find out whether there is a risk of diseases from mosquitoes, and if so, whether there is a vaccine or medicine to prevent those diseases. See a health care provider familiar with travel medicine, ideally 4 to 6 weeks before your trip.

Your toenails and fingernails protect the tissues of your toes and fingers. They are made up of layers of a hardened protein called keratin, which is also in your hair and skin. The health of your nails can be a clue to your overall health. Healthy nails are usually smooth and consistent in color. Specific types of nail discoloration and changes in growth rate can be signs of lung, heart, kidney, and liver diseases, as well as diabetes and anemia. White spots and vertical ridges are harmless. Nail problems that sometimes require treatment include: Bacterial and fungal infections Ingrown nails Tumors Warts Keeping your nails clean, dry, and trimmed can help you avoid some problems. Do not remove the cuticle, which can cause infection.

Pemphigus is an autoimmune disorder . If you have it, your immune system attacks healthy cells in your skin and mouth, causing blisters and sores. No one knows the cause. Pemphigus does not spread from person to person. It does not appear to be inherited. But some people's genes put them more at risk for pemphigus. Pemphigoid is also an autoimmune skin disease. It leads to deep blisters that do not break easily. Pemphigoid is most common in older adults and may be fatal for older, sick patients. Doctors diagnose pemphigus with a physical exam, a biopsy, and blood tests. The treatment of pemphigus and pemphigoid is the same: one or more medicines to control symptoms. These may include: Steroids , which reduce inflammation Drugs that suppress the immune system response Antibiotics to treat associated infections NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Piercings and tattoos are body decorations that go back to ancient times. Body piercing involves making a hole in the skin so that you can insert jewelry. This is often in the earlobe, but can be in other parts of the body. Tattoos are designs on the skin made with needles and colored ink. A permanent tattoo is meant to last forever. Permanent makeup is a type of tattoo. The health risks of piercings and tattoos include: Allergic reactions Keloids, a type of scar that forms during healing Infections, such as hepatitis To reduce the risks, make sure that the facility is clean, safe and has a good reputation. Proper sterilization of the equipment is important. Be sure to follow the instructions on caring for your skin. Holes from piercing usually close up if you no longer wear the jewelry. It is possible to remove tattoos, but it's painful and can cause scarring.

If you spend time outdoors, chances are you have been bothered by poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac at some point. Most people are sensitive to the plants' oily sap. The sap is in the root, stems, leaves and fruit of these plants. If it gets on your skin, it causes a blistering skin rash . The rash can range from mild to severe, depending on how much sap gets on your skin and how sensitive you are to it. Problems can also happen if the plants are burned. Airborne sap-coated soot can get into the eyes, nose, throat and respiratory system. The best way to avoid the rash is to learn what the plants look like and stay away from them. If you come into contact with the plants, wash your skin and clothing right away.  If you develop a rash, ask your pharmacist about over-the-counter medicines. For severe rashes, see your doctor. National Park Service

Pressure sores are areas of damaged skin caused by staying in one position for too long. They commonly form where your bones are close to your skin, such as your ankles, back, elbows, heels and hips. You are at risk if you are bedridden, use a wheelchair, or are unable to change your position. Pressure sores can cause serious infections, some of which are life-threatening. They can be a problem for people in nursing homes. You can prevent the sores by : Keeping skin clean and dry Changing position every two hours Using pillows and products that relieve pressure Pressure sores have a variety of treatments. Advanced sores are slow to heal, so early treatment is best.

Psoriasis is a skin disease that causes itchy or sore patches of thick, red skin with silvery scales. You usually get the patches on your elbows, knees, scalp, back, face, palms and feet, but they can show up on other parts of your body.  Some people who have psoriasis also get a form of arthritis called psoriatic arthritis . A problem with your immune system causes psoriasis. In a process called cell turnover, skin cells that grow deep in your skin rise to the surface. Normally, this takes a month. In psoriasis, it happens in just days because your cells rise too fast. Psoriasis can be hard to diagnose because it can look like other skin diseases. Your doctor might need to look at a small skin sample under a microscope. Psoriasis can last a long time, even a lifetime. Symptoms come and go. Things that make them worse include: Infections Stress Dry skin Certain medicines Psoriasis usually occurs in adults. It sometimes runs in families. Treatments include creams, medicines, and light therapy. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

A rash is an area of irritated or swollen skin. Many rashes are itchy, red, painful, and irritated. Some rashes can also lead to blisters or patches of raw skin.  Rashes are a symptom of many different medical problems. Other causes include irritating substances and allergies. Certain genes can make people more likely to get rashes. Contact dermatitis is a common type of rash. It causes redness, itching, and sometimes small bumps. You get the rash where you have touched an irritant, such as a chemical, or something you are allergic to, like poison ivy . Some rashes develop right away. Others form over several days. Although most rashes clear up fairly quickly, others are long-lasting and need  long-term treatment. Because rashes can be caused by many different things, it's important to figure out what kind you have before you treat it. If it is a bad rash, if it does not go away, or if you have other symptoms, you should see your health care provider. Treatments may include moisturizers, lotions, baths, cortisone creams that relieve swelling, and antihistamines, which relieve itching.

Rosacea is a long-term disease that affects your skin and sometimes your eyes. It causes redness and pimples. Rosacea is most common in women and people with fair skin. It most often affects middle-aged and older adults. In most cases, rosacea only affects the face. Symptoms can include: Frequent redness of the face, or flushing Small, red lines under the skin Acne A swollen nose Thick skin, usually on the forehead, chin, and cheeks Red, dry, itchy eyes and sometimes vision problems No one knows what causes rosacea. You may be more likely to have it if you blush a lot or if rosacea runs in your family. Rosacea is not dangerous. There is no cure, but treatments can help. They include medicines and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Rubella is an infection caused by a virus. It is usually mild with fever and a rash. About half of the people who get rubella do not have symptoms. If you do get them, symptoms may include: A rash that starts on the face and spreads to the body Mild fever Aching joints, especially in young women Swollen glands Rubella is most dangerous for a pregnant woman's baby. It can cause miscarriage or birth defects. Rubella spreads when an infected person coughs or sneezes. People without symptoms can still spread it. There is no treatment, but the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine can prevent it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Scabies is an itchy skin condition caused by the microscopic mite Sarcoptes scabei. It is common all over the world, and can affect anyone. Scabies spreads quickly in crowded conditions where there is frequent skin-to-skin contact between people. Hospitals, child-care centers, and nursing homes are examples. Scabies can easily infect sex partners and other household members. Sharing clothes, towels, and bedding can sometimes spread scabies.  This can happen much more easily when the infested person has crusted scabies. You cannot get scabies from a pet. Pets get a different mite infection called mange. Symptoms are: Pimple-like irritations or a rash Intense itching, especially at night Sores caused by scratching Your health care provider diagnoses scabies by looking at the skin rash and finding burrows in the skin. Several lotions are available to treat scabies. The infected person's clothes, bedding and towels should be washed in hot water and dried in a hot dryer. Treatment is also recommended for household members and sexual partners. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

A scar is a permanent patch of skin that grows over a wound . It forms when your body heals itself after a cut, scrape, burn, or sore. You can also get scars from surgery that cuts through the skin, infections like chickenpox, or skin conditions like acne . Scars are often thicker, as well as pinker, redder, or shinier, than the rest of your skin. How your scar looks depends on: How big and deep your wound is Where it is How long it takes to heal Your age Your inherited tendency to scar Scars usually fade over time but never go away completely. If the way a scar looks bothers you, various treatments might minimize it. These include surgical revision, dermabrasion, laser treatments, injections, chemical peels, and creams.

What is scleroderma? Scleroderma means "hard skin." It's the name of an autoimmune disease that causes inflammation and thickening in the skin and other areas of the body.  This inflammation causes you to have areas of tight, hard skin.  Scleroderma may affect just one area of your body, or it can affect many systems in your body. What are the types of scleroderma? There are two main types of scleroderma: Localized scleroderma only affects your skin and the muscles and tissues just under your skin. Systemic scleroderma, which is also called systemic sclerosis, is a more serious type. It affects many parts of your body and can damage your blood vessels and internal organs, such as your heart , lungs , and kidneys . What causes scleroderma? The exact cause of scleroderma is unknown. Researchers think that several factors may play a part in causing the disease: Your genetics. Certain genes can increase the chance that you will develop scleroderma. They may also play a role in which the type of scleroderma you have. Scleroderma is not passed from parent to child, but you are more likely to develop it if a close relative has it. Your environment. Exposure to certain things in the environment, such as viruses or chemicals, may trigger scleroderma. Immune system changes . When your immune system changes, it can trigger your cells to make too much collagen in the body. Too much collagen causes patches of tight, hard skin. Hormones . Hormonal or immune system differences between women and men might play a part in the disease. Who is more likely to develop scleroderma? Anyone can get scleroderma, but certain factors may make you more likely to develop it: Your sex. Scleroderma is more common in women than in men. Your age. The disease usually appears between the ages of 30 and 50. Your race. Scleroderma can affect people of all races and ethnic groups, but the disease can affect African Americans more severely. What are the symptoms of scleroderma? The symptoms of scleroderma are different for each person, depending on the type of scleroderma you have: Localized scleroderma usually causes patches of thick, hard skin in one of two patterns: Patches in firm, oval shapes that stay in one area or spread to other areas of skin. This is called morphea. Lines of thickened or different colored skin that run down your arm, leg, and, rarely, on the forehead. This is called linear scleroderma. Systemic scleroderma can cause problems with your internal organs as well as your skin. It can cause symptoms such as: Thick, tight skin on your fingers Fatigue Raynaud's phenomenon , a narrowing of blood vessels in the hands or feet Damage to your internal organs, including your digestive system , lungs, kidneys, and heart How is scleroderma diagnosed? There is no single test for scleroderma. The symptoms can vary from person to person and can be similar to those of other diseases. This can make scleroderma hard to diagnose. To find out if you have scleroderma, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history Will do a physical exam May order blood tests, including an ANA (antinuclear antibody) test May do a skin biopsy May do other tests, such as imaging tests , to check for organ damage What are the treatments for scleroderma? There is no cure for scleroderma, but treatments can help control your symptoms and limit damage. The treatments may include: Medicines to help decrease swelling, manage pain , control other symptoms, and prevent complications. Physical or occupational therapy to help with pain, improve muscle strength, and teach you ways to help with daily living. Regular dental care, because scleroderma can make your mouth dry and damage connective tissues in your mouth. These problems can speed up tooth decay and cause your teeth to become loose. You may need to see specialists to help treat your disease. Many people with scleroderma will see a rheumatologist. This is a doctor who specializes in rheumatic diseases such as arthritis and other inflammatory or autoimmune disorders. Dermatologists, who specialize in conditions of the skin, hair, and nails, may also play an important role in treating the disease. And if you have organ damage, you may need to see other specialists. You can also help manage some of your symptoms, for example by: Dressing warm and avoiding cold or wet environments Quitting smoking (if you smoke) Putting on sunscreen before you go outdoors Using moisturizers on your skin to help lessen stiffness Avoiding hot baths and showers, harsh soaps, and household cleaners Getting regular physical activity NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is shingles? Shingles (herpes zoster) is an infection that causes a painful rash. It is caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). This is the same virus that causes chickenpox . After you have chickenpox, the virus stays in your body. It may not cause problems for many years. But as you get older, the virus may become active again and cause shingles. Is shingles contagious? Shingles is not contagious. You cannot get shingles from someone else. But you can catch chickenpox from someone with shingles if you have direct contact with fluid from their shingles rash. The risk of spreading the virus is low if the shingles rash is kept covered. People with shingles cannot spread the virus before their rash blisters appear or after the rash crusts. Who is at risk for shingles? Anyone who has had chickenpox can get shingles. But the risk of shingles goes up as you get older. Shingles is most common in people over age 50. People with weakened immune systems are at higher risk of getting shingles. This includes those who: Have immune system diseases such as HIV Have certain cancers Take medicines that weaken their immune system, such as steroids and medicines you take after organ transplant Your immune system may be weaker when you have an infection or are stressed. This can raise your risk of shingles. It is rare, but possible, to get shingles more than once. What are the symptoms of shingles? Early signs of shingles include burning or shooting pain and tingling or itching. It is usually on one side of the body or face. The pain can be mild to severe. Up to several days later, you will get a rash. It consists of blisters that typically scab over in 7 to 10 days. The rash is usually a single stripe around either the left or the right side of the body. In other cases, the rash is only on one side of the face. In rare cases (usually among people with weakened immune systems), the rash may be more widespread. It might look similar to a chickenpox rash. Some people may also have other symptoms: Fever Headache Chills Upset stomach What other problems can shingles cause? Shingles can cause other problems (complications): Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is most common complication of shingles. It causes severe pain in the areas where you had the shingles rash. It usually gets better in a few weeks or months. But some people can have pain from PHN for many years, and it can interfere with daily life. Vision loss can happen if shingles affects your eye. It may be temporary or permanent. Hearing or balance problems are possible if you have shingles within or near your ear. You may also have weakness of the muscles on that side of your face. These problems can be temporary or permanent. Very rarely, shingles can also lead to pneumonia , brain inflammation ( encephalitis ), or death. How is shingles diagnosed? Usually your health care provider can diagnose shingles by taking your medical history and looking at your rash. In some cases, your provider may scrap off tissue from the rash or swab some fluid from the blisters and send the sample to a lab for testing. What are the treatments for shingles? There is no cure for shingles. Antiviral medicines may help to make the attack shorter and less severe. They may also help prevent PHN. The medicines are most effective if you can take them within 3 days after the rash appears. So if you think you might have shingles, contact your provider as soon as possible. Pain relievers may also help with the pain. A cool washcloth, calamine lotion, and oatmeal baths may help relieve some of the itching. Can shingles be prevented? There is a vaccine, called Shingrix, to help prevent shingles and its complications. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that healthy adults 50 years and older get the vaccine. Your provider might also recommend the vaccine if you are over 19 and have a weakened immune system. The vaccine is given in two doses. If you have shingles, you can help prevent spreading the virus to others by: Staying away from: People with weakened immune systems People who have not had chickenpox or the chickenpox vaccine, especially if they are pregnant Premature or low birth weight babies Keeping the rash covered Not touching or scratching the rash Washing your hands often Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Your skin changes as you age. You might notice wrinkles, age spots and dryness. Your skin also becomes thinner and loses fat, making it less plump and smooth. It might take longer to heal, too. Sunlight is a major cause of skin aging. You can protect yourself by staying out of the sun when it is strongest, using sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or higher, wearing protective clothing, and avoiding sunlamps and tanning beds. Cigarette smoking also contributes to wrinkles. The wrinkling increases with the amount of cigarettes and number of years a person has smoked. Many products claim to revitalize aging skin or reduce wrinkles, but the Food and Drug Administration has approved only a few for sun-damaged or aging skin. Various treatments soothe dry skin and reduce the appearance of age spots. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer in the United States. The two most common types are basal cell cancer and squamous cell cancer. They usually form on the head, face, neck, hands, and arms. Another type of skin cancer, melanoma , is more dangerous but less common. Anyone can get skin cancer, but it is more common in people who : Spend a lot of time in the sun or have been sunburned Have light-colored skin, hair and eyes Have a family member with skin cancer Are over age 50 You should have your doctor check any suspicious skin markings and any changes in the way your skin looks. Treatment is more likely to work well when cancer is found early.  If not treated, some types of skin cancer cells can spread to other tissues and organs. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, photodynamic therapy (PDT), and biologic therapy. PDT uses a drug and a type of laser light to kill cancer cells. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What does your skin do? Your skin is your body's largest organ. It covers the entire outside of your body. There are many ways that your skin protects your body and helps keep you healthy. For example, it: Holds body fluids in, which helps prevent you from getting dehydrated Keeps out harmful germs, which helps prevent infections Helps you feel things like heat, cold, and pain Helps control your body temperature Makes vitamin D when the sun shines on it Shields your body against heat and light What problems and conditions can affect your skin? There are many different problems and conditions which can affect your skin. Some of them can cause uncomfortable symptoms, such as itching , burning, redness, and rashes . They might also affect your appearance. Some of the more common skin conditions include: Acne , which causes pimples when hair follicles under your skin get clogged up Burns Cuts and scrapes Dandruff , flaking of the skin on your scalp (the top of your head) Eczema (atopic dermatitis), which causes inflammation, redness, and irritation of the skin Hives , which are red and sometimes itchy bumps on your skin Insect bites Psoriasis , which causes itchy, scaly red patches Skin cancer Skin infections How can I keep my skin healthy? Since your skin protects your body in many ways, it's important to try to keep your skin healthy. For example, you can: Wear the right protective equipment, like gloves, long sleeves, knee and elbow pads, or helmets to protect against cuts, bumps and scrapes. If you do get a cut or scrape, clean it right away with soap and warm water. Put on a bandage to protect it while it heals. When you are spending time outdoors, wear long sleeves and pants and use insect repellant to prevent insect bites. Prevent sunburn by covering up and using sunscreen when outdoors. Wash your hands often with soap and water. When you take a shower or bath, use warm (not hot) water. Use mild cleansers and wash gently (don't scrub). Use moisturizers, like lotions, creams, or ointments, to prevent dry skin. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Pigmentation means coloring. Skin pigmentation disorders affect the color of your skin. Your skin gets its color from a pigment called melanin. Special cells in the skin make melanin. When these cells become damaged or unhealthy, it affects melanin production. Some pigmentation disorders affect just patches of skin. Others affect your entire body. If your body makes too much melanin, your skin gets darker. Pregnancy, Addison's disease, and sun exposure all can make your skin darker. If your body makes too little melanin, your skin gets lighter. Vitiligo is a condition that causes patches of light skin. Albinism is a genetic condition affecting a person's skin. A person with albinism may have no color, lighter than normal skin color, or patchy missing skin color. Infections, blisters and burns can also cause lighter skin.

Ultraviolet (UV) rays are an invisible form of radiation. They can pass through your skin and damage your skin cells. Sunburns are a sign of skin damage. Suntans aren't healthy, either. They appear after the sun's rays have already killed some cells and damaged others. UV rays can cause skin damage during any season or at any temperature.  They can also cause eye problems, wrinkles , skin spots, and skin cancer . To protect yourself : Stay out of the sun when it is strongest (between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m.) Use sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or higher Wear protective clothing Wear wraparound sunglasses that provide 100% UV ray protection Avoid sunlamps and tanning beds Check your skin regularly for changes in the size, shape, color, or feel of birthmarks, moles, and spots. Such changes are a sign of skin cancer. Food and Drug Administration

Can a tan be healthy? Some people think that tanning gives them a healthy glow. But tanning, either outdoors or indoors with a tanning bed, is not healthy at all. It exposes you to harmful rays and puts you at risk for health problems such as melanoma and other skin cancers . What are UV rays, and how do they affect the skin? Sunlight travels to earth as a mixture of both visible and invisible rays. Some of the rays are harmless to people. But one kind, ultraviolet (UV) rays, can cause problems. They are a form of radiation. UV rays do help your body make vitamin D , but too much exposure damages your skin. Most people can get the vitamin D that they need with only about 5 to 15 minutes of sun exposure two to three times a week. There are three types of UV rays. Two of them, UVA and UVB, can reach the earth's surface and affect your skin. Using a tanning bed also exposes you to UVA and UVB. UVB rays can cause sunburn. UVA rays can travel more deeply into the skin than UVB rays. When your skin is exposed to UVA, it tries to protect itself from further damage. It does this by making more melanin, which is the skin pigment that makes your skin darker. That's what gives you a tan. This means that your tan is a sign of skin damage. What are the health risks of tanning? Since tanning means overexposure to UV rays, it can damage your skin and cause health problems such as: Premature skin aging , which can cause your skin to become thickened, leathery, and wrinkled. You may also have dark spots on your skin. These happen because long-term exposure to UV rays makes your skin less elastic. The more sun exposure you have, the earlier your skin ages . Skin cancers , including melanoma. This can happen because the UV light damages the DNA of your skin cells and interferes with your body's ability to fight the cancer. Actinic keratosis , a thick, scaly patch of skin that usually forms on areas exposed to the sun, such as the face, scalp, back of the hands, or chest. It can eventually become cancerous. Eye damage , including cataracts and photokeratitis (snow blindness) A weakened immune system , which can increase your sensitivity to sunlight, decrease the effects of vaccines , and cause you to have reactions to certain medicines. What should I do to protect my skin from UV rays? Limit sun exposure . Try to stay out of the sun between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., when its rays are strongest. But remember that you still get sun exposure when you are outside on cloudy days or are in the shade. Use sunscreen with sun protective factor (SPF) 15 or higher. It should also be a broad-spectrum sunscreen, which means that it gives you both UVA and UVB protection. If you have very light skin, use SPF 30 or higher. Apply sunscreen 20-30 minutes before going outside and reapply it at least every 2 hours. Wear sunglasses that block both UVA and UVB rays. Wrap-around sunglasses work best because they block UV rays from sneaking in from the side. Wear a hat . You can get the best protection with a wide-brimmed hat that is made out of a tightly woven fabric, such as canvas. Wear protective clothing such as long-sleeved shirts and long pants and skirts. Clothes made from tightly woven fabric offer the best protection. It is also important to check your skin once a month. If you do see any new or changing spots or moles, go see your health care provider. Isn't indoor tanning safer than tanning in the sun? Indoor tanning is not better than tanning in the sun; it also exposes you to UV rays and damages your skin. Tanning beds use UVA light, so they expose you to a higher concentration of UVA rays than you would get by tanning in the sun. Tanning lights also expose you to some UVB rays. Some people think that getting a "base tan" in a tanning salon can protect you when you go in the sun. But a "base tan" causes damage to your skin and will not prevent you from getting sunburn when you go outside. Indoor tanning is particularly dangerous for younger people. You have a higher risk of melanoma if you started doing indoor tanning while you were a teen or young adult. Some research shows that frequent tanning may even be addictive. This can be dangerous because the more often you tan, the more damage you do to your skin. Are there safer ways to look tan? There are other ways to look tan, but they are not all safe: Tanning pills have a color additive that turns your skin orange after you take them. But they can be dangerous and are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Sunless tanners have no known risk for skin cancer, but you do have to be careful. Most spray tans, lotions, and gels use DHA, a color additive that makes your skin look tan. DHA is considered safe for use on the outside of your body by the FDA. You need to make sure it doesn't get into your nose, eyes, or mouth. If you use a spray tan, be careful not to breathe in the spray. Also, remember that these "tans" do not protect you from UV rays when you go outside.

What are ticks? Ticks are small parasites. They may look like insects, but they have eight legs and are related to spiders. Ticks feed on the blood of people and warm-blooded animals. There are many types of ticks in the United States, and they live in different parts of the country. Ticks can be different colors and sizes. They can be light-colored, reddish brown, or dark brown. Some ticks are so small that they can be difficult to see. Ticks may get on you if you walk though areas where they live, such as tall grass, leaf litter or shrubs. Why do I need to be worried about tick bites? If you spend time outdoors or have pets that go outdoors, you need to beware of ticks. When they bite, certain types of ticks can pass on germs that cause different diseases. Sometimes the symptoms can be mild. In other cases, you can have serious, long-lasting health problems. Some of the diseases you can get from a tick bite (called tickborne diseases) include: Lyme disease Alpha-gal syndrome (tick bite red meat allergy) Babesiosis Ehrlichiosis Rocky Mountain spotted fever Tularemia What happens if I get bitten by a tick? You may not feel it when a tick bites you. The tick can stay attached to your body for several days. If that tick is infected, it can pass along any germs to you once it starts sucking your blood. But if you catch it and remove it before it has filled up on your blood, you are less likely to get infected. How do I remove a tick? If you find a tick attached to your skin, remove the tick as soon as you can. You could use a tick removal device or a fine-tipped tweezers: Using the tweezers, grab the tick as close to your skin as possible. Pull upward with steady, even pressure. Don't twist or jerk the tick. You want to remove the whole tick in one piece if you can. If the mouth-parts of the tick break off and stay in the skin, try to remove them. But if you can't remove them easily, then leave them. Thoroughly clean the bite area and your hands with rubbing alcohol or soap and water. When do I need to contact my health care provider about a tick bite? Many tickborne diseases can have similar signs and symptoms. The most common are: Fever Chills Aches and pains Rash If you develop any of these symptoms within several weeks of removing a tick, contact your provider. How can I prevent tick bites? There are steps you can take to prevent tick bites: Avoid wooded, brushy, and grassy areas, especially during warmer months. Wear insect repellent with DEET, picaridin or another U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. Wear light-colored protective clothing. Treat your clothing and gear with products containing 0.5% permethrin. Tuck your pant legs into your socks and your shirt into your pants. Remove your clothing after being outdoors. Check your clothing for ticks and remove any ticks that you find. Wash and dry your clothes at high temperatures. Check yourself, your children, and your pets daily for ticks and carefully remove any ticks you find.

Tinea is the name of a group of diseases caused by a fungus.  Types of tinea include ringworm, athlete's foot and jock itch. These infections are usually not serious, but they can be uncomfortable. You can get them by touching an infected person, from damp surfaces such as shower floors, or even from a pet. Symptoms depend on the affected area of the body: Ringworm is a red skin rash that forms a ring around normal-looking skin. A worm doesn't cause it. Scalp ringworm causes itchy, red patches on your head. It can leave bald spots. It usually affects children. Athlete's foot causes itching, burning and cracked skin between your toes. Jock itch causes an itchy, burning rash in your groin area. Over-the-counter creams and powders will get rid of many tinea infections, particularly athlete's foot and jock itch. Other cases require prescription medicine.

Vitiligo causes white patches on your skin. It can also affect your eyes, mouth, and nose.  It occurs when the cells that give your skin its color are destroyed. No one knows what destroys them. It is more common in people with autoimmune diseases, and it might run in families. It usually starts before age 40. The white patches are more common where your skin is exposed to the sun. In some cases, the patches spread. Vitiligo can cause your hair to gray early. If you have dark skin, you may lose color inside your mouth. Using sunscreen will help protect your skin, and cosmetics can cover up the patches. Treatments for vitiligo include medicines, light therapy, and surgery. Not every treatment is right for everyone. Many have side effects. Some take a long time. Some do not always work. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Warts are growths on your skin caused by an infection with humanpapilloma virus, or HPV .  Types of warts include : Common warts, which often appear on your fingers Plantar warts, which show up on the soles of your feet Genital warts , which are a sexually transmitted infection (STI) Flat warts, which appear in places you shave frequently In children, warts often go away on their own. In adults, they tend to stay. If they hurt or bother you, or if they multiply, you can remove them. Chemical skin treatments usually work. If not, various freezing, surgical and laser treatments can remove warts.

An injury is damage to your body. It is a general term that refers to harm caused by accidents, falls , hits, weapons, and more. In the U.S., millions of people injure themselves every year. These injuries range from minor to life-threatening. Injuries can happen at work or play , indoors or outdoors, driving a car, or walking across the street. Wounds are injuries that break the skin or other body tissues.   They include cuts, scrapes, scratches, and punctured skin. They often happen because of an accident, but surgery, sutures, and stitches also cause wounds. Minor wounds usually aren't serious, but it is important to clean them. Serious and infected wounds may require first aid followed by a visit to your doctor. You should also seek attention if the wound is deep, you cannot close it yourself, you cannot stop the bleeding or get the dirt out, or it does not heal. Other common types of injuries include: Animal bites Bruises Burns Dislocations Electrical injuries Fractures (broken bones) Sprains and strains

An induced abortion is a procedure to end a pregnancy. It can be done two different ways: Medication abortion (also called medical abortion) Procedural abortion An induced abortion is different from a spontaneous abortion. That is the loss of a pregnancy before the 20th week of pregnancy. It is more commonly known as a miscarriage . If you are thinking of having an induced abortion, talk with your health care provider. Your provider can explain how the procedures are done, as well as the risks and benefits of each.

Assisted reproductive technology (ART) is used to treat infertility . It includes fertility treatments that handle both eggs and sperm. It works by removing eggs from the ovaries. The eggs are then mixed with sperm to make embryos. The embryos are then put back in the parent's body. In vitro fertilization (IVF) is the most common and effective type of ART. ART procedures sometimes use donor eggs, donor sperm, or previously frozen embryos. It may also involve a surrogate or gestational carrier. A surrogate is a person who becomes pregnant with sperm from one partner of the couple. A gestational carrier becomes pregnant with an egg from one partner and sperm from the other partner. The most common complication of ART is a multiple pregnancy . It can be prevented or minimized by limiting the number of embryos that are put into the parent's body.

What is birth control? Birth control, also known as contraception, is the use of medicines, devices, or surgery to prevent pregnancy. There are many different types. Some are reversible, while others are permanent. Some types can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs). What are the different types of birth control? There are several different types of birth control, and they work in different ways: Barrier methods Male condom A thin sheath that covers the penis to collect sperm and prevent it from entering the woman's body. Condoms that are made of latex and polyurethane can help prevent STIs. Female condom A thin, flexible plastic pouch. Part of the condom is inserted into the vagina before intercourse to prevent sperm from entering the uterus. The uterus, or womb, is the place where the baby grows during pregnancy. Female condoms can also help prevent STIs. Contraceptive sponge A small sponge that you put into the vagina to cover the cervix (the opening of the uterus). The sponge also contains a spermicide to kill sperm. Spermicide A substance that can kill sperm cells. It comes in a foam, jelly, cream, suppository, or film. You put it into the vagina near the uterus. Spermicide can be used alone or with a diaphragm or cervical cap. Diaphragm and cervical cap Cups that are placed inside the vagina to cover the cervix. They may be used with spermicide. They come in different sizes, so it's important to see your health care provider to figure out which size works best for you. Hormonal methods Oral contraceptives ("the pill") Pills that a woman takes every day. They may contain only progestin or both progestin and estrogen. Contraceptive patch A patch that a woman puts on her skin each week. The patch releases hormones into the bloodstream. Vaginal ring A thin, flexible ring. The woman inserts the ring into the vagina, where it continually releases hormones for three weeks. She takes it out for the fourth week. After that week, she puts in a new ring. Injectable birth control An injection of a hormone that a woman gets once every three months. This is done in your provider's office. Implant A single, thin rod that a provider inserts under the skin of a women's upper arm.  It is done in your provider's office. The implant can last for four years. Long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) Intrauterine device (IUD) A small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the uterus. This is done in the provider's office. IUDs can last from 3 to 10 years. There are two types: hormonal IUDs and copper IUDs. Sterilization Tubal ligation A surgery that prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is permanent. Vasectomy A surgery that prevents a man from getting someone pregnant. It is permanent. What are some other forms of pregnancy prevention? There are some types of pregnancy prevention that do not involve medicines, devices, or surgery: Other forms of pregnancy prevention Fertility awareness-based methods They are also called natural rhythm methods. They involve tracking the woman's fertility cycle and avoiding sex or using barrier methods on the days when she is most likely to get pregnant. This method may have higher pregnancy rates than other types. Lactational amenorrhea method (LAM) A form of natural birth control for breastfeeding mothers. It relies on the new mother feeding her baby only breastmilk for up to six months and having no periods or spotting during that time. Withdrawal During intercourse, the penis is pulled out of the vagina before ejaculation. The goal is to keep sperm from entering the vagina . But the sperm can leak out before the penis is pulled out, so this method has higher pregnancy rates than other types. What is emergency contraception? Emergency contraception is not a regular method of birth control. But it can be used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected intercourse or if a condom breaks. There are two types: Copper IUD, which is a small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse. Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs), which are hormonal pills which the woman takes as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse. What else should I know about birth control? When deciding which birth control type is right for you, there are many different factors to consider: Do you want to have children someday? How soon? Do you have any health conditions? How often do you have sex? How many sex partners do you have? Do you also need protection from HIV and other STIs? How well does the birth control method work? Are there any side effects? Will you be able to use it correctly every time? How much does it cost? Your provider can answer your questions about birth control to help you select the best type for you. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is breast cancer? Breast cancer is a cancer that starts in breast tissue.  It happens when cells in the breast change and grow out of control. The cells usually form a tumor. Sometimes the cancer does not spread any further. This is called "in situ." If the cancer spreads outside the breast, the cancer is called "invasive." It may just spread to nearby tissues and lymph nodes. Or the cancer may metastasize (spread to other parts of the body) through the lymph system or the blood. Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in women in the United States. Rarely, it can also affect men . What are the types of breast cancer? There are different types of breast cancer. The types are based on which breast cells turn into cancer. The types include: Ductal carcinoma , which begins in the cells of the ducts. This is the most common type. Lobular carcinoma , which begins in the lobules. It is more often found in both breasts than other types of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer , in which cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. The breast becomes warm, red, and swollen. This is a rare type. Paget's disease of the breast , which is a cancer involving the skin of the nipple. It usually also affects the darker skin around the nipple. It is also rare. What causes breast cancer? Breast cancer happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA). Often, the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. But sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Breast cancer that is caused by inherited genetic changes is called hereditary breast cancer. There are also certain genetic changes that can raise your risk of breast cancer, including changes in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. These two changes also raise your risk of ovarian and other cancers. Besides genetics, your lifestyle and the environment can affect your risk of breast cancer. Who is at risk for breast cancer? The factors that raise your risk of breast cancer include: Older age History of breast cancer or benign (noncancer) breast disease Inherited risk of breast cancer, including having BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene changes Dense breast tissue A reproductive history that leads to more exposure to the estrogen hormone, including Menstruating at an early age Being at an older age when you first gave birth or never having given birth Starting menopause at a later age Taking hormone therapy for symptoms of menopause Radiation therapy to the breast or chest Obesity Drinking alcohol What are the signs and symptoms of breast cancer? The signs and symptoms of breast cancer include: A new lump or thickening in or near the breast or in the armpit. A change in the size or shape of the breast. A dimple or puckering in the skin of the breast. It may look like the skin of an orange. A nipple turned inward into the breast. Nipple discharge other than breast milk. The discharge might happen suddenly, be bloody, or happen in only one breast. Scaly, red, or swollen skin in the nipple area or the breast Pain in any area of the breast. How is breast cancer diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose breast cancer and figure out which type you have: A physical exam, including a clinical breast exam (CBE). This involves checking for any lumps or anything else that seems unusual with the breasts and armpits. A medical history. Imaging tests, such as a mammogram , an ultrasound , or an MRI . Breast biopsy . Blood chemistry tests, which measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Some of the specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , and an electrolyte panel . If these tests show that you have breast cancer, you will have tests that study the cancer cells. These tests help your provider decide which treatment would be best for you. The tests may include: Genetic tests for genetic changes such as in the BRCA and TP53 genes. HER2 test . HER2 is a protein involved with cell growth. It is on the outside of all breast cells. If your breast cancer cells have more HER2 than normal, they can grow more quickly and spread to other parts of the body. An estrogen and progesterone receptor test. This test measures the amount of estrogen and progesterone ( hormones ) receptors in cancer tissue. If there are more receptors than normal, the cancer is called estrogen and/or progesterone receptor positive. This type of breast cancer may grow more quickly. Another step is staging the cancer. Staging involves doing tests to find out whether the cancer has spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. The tests may include other diagnostic imaging tests and a sentinel lymph node biopsy. This biopsy is done to see whether the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. What are the treatments for breast cancer? Treatments for breast cancer include: Surgery such as A mastectomy , which removes the whole breast A lumpectomy to remove the cancer and some normal tissue around it, but not the breast itself Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Hormone therapy, which blocks cancer cells from getting the hormones they need to grow Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Immunotherapy Can breast cancer be prevented? You may be able to help prevent breast cancer by making healthy lifestyle changes such as: Staying at a healthy weight Limiting alcohol use Getting enough exercise e Limiting your exposure to estrogen by Breastfeeding your babies if you can Limiting hormone therapy If you are at high risk, your health care provider may suggest that you take certain medicines to lower the risk. Some women at very high risk may decide to get a mastectomy (of their healthy breasts) to prevent breast cancer. It's also important to get regular mammograms. They may be able to identify breast cancer in the early stages, when it is easier to treat. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Most women experience breast changes at some time. Your age, hormone levels, and medicines you take may cause lumps, bumps, and discharges (fluids that are not breast milk). If you have a breast lump, pain, discharge or skin irritation, see your health care provider. Minor and serious breast problems have similar  symptoms. Although many women fear cancer , most breast problems are not cancer. Some common breast changes are: Fibrocystic breast changes - lumpiness, thickening and swelling, often just before a woman's period Cysts - fluid-filled lumps Fibroadenomas - solid, round, rubbery lumps that move easily when pushed, occurring most in younger women Intraductal papillomas - growths similar to warts near the nipple Blocked milk ducts Milk production when a woman is not breastfeeding NIH: National Cancer Institute

Breastfeeding offers many benefits to your baby. Breast milk contains the right balance of nutrients to help your infant grow into a strong and healthy toddler. Some of the nutrients in breast milk also help protect your infant against some common childhood illnesses and infections. It may also help your health. Certain types of cancer may occur less often in mothers who have breastfed their babies. Women who don't have health problems should try to give their babies breast milk for at least the first six months of life. Most women with health problems can breastfeed. There are rare exceptions when women are advised not to breastfeed because they have certain illnesses.  Some medicines, illegal drugs, and alcohol can also pass through the breast milk and cause harm to your baby. Check with your health care provider if you have concerns about whether you should breastfeed. If you are having problems with breastfeeding, contact a lactation consultant. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

If you need a mastectomy , you have a choice about whether or not to have surgery to rebuild the shape of the breast. Instead of breast reconstruction, you could choose to wear a breast form that replaces the breast, wear padding inside your bra, or do nothing. All of these options have pros and cons. What is right for one woman may not be right for another. Breast reconstruction may be done at the same time as the mastectomy, or it may be done later on. If radiation therapy is part of the treatment plan, your doctor may suggest waiting until after radiation therapy. If you're thinking about breast reconstruction, talk to a plastic surgeon before the mastectomy, even if you plan to have your reconstruction later on. A surgeon can reconstruct the breast in many ways. Some women choose to have breast implants, which are filled with saline or silicone gel. Another method uses tissue taken from another part of your body. The plastic surgeon can take skin, muscle, and fat from your lower abdomen, back, or buttocks. The type of reconstruction that is best for you depends on your age, body type, and the type of cancer surgery that you had. A plastic surgeon can help you decide. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, the place where a baby grows during pregnancy. Cervical cancer is caused by a virus called HPV . The virus spreads through sexual contact. Most women's bodies are able to fight HPV infection. But sometimes the virus leads to cancer. You're at higher risk if you smoke, have had many children, use birth control pills for a long time, or have HIV infection. Cervical cancer may not cause any symptoms at first. Later, you may have pelvic pain or bleeding from the vagina. It usually takes several years for normal cells in the cervix to turn into cancer cells. Your health care provider can find abnormal cells by doing a Pap test to examine cells from the cervix. You may also have an HPV test.  If your results are abnormal, you may need a biopsy or other tests. By getting regular screenings , you can find and treat any problems before they turn into cancer. Treatment may include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination. The choice of treatment depends on the size of the tumor, whether the cancer has spread and whether you would like to become pregnant someday. Vaccines can protect against several types of HPV, including some that can cause cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, the place where a baby grows during pregnancy.  Cancer screening is looking for cancer before you have any symptoms. Cancer found early may be easier to treat. Cervical cancer screening is usually part of a woman's health checkup .  There are two types of tests: the Pap test and the HPV test.   For both, the doctor or nurse collects cells from the surface of the cervix.  With the Pap test, the lab checks the sample for cancer cells or abnormal cells that could become cancer later.  With the HPV test, the lab checks for HPV infection.  HPV is a virus that spreads through sexual contact.  It can sometimes lead to cancer.  If your screening tests are abnormal, your doctor may do more tests, such as a biopsy . Cervical cancer screening has risks.  The results can sometimes be wrong, and you may have unnecessary follow-up tests.  There are also benefits.  Screening has been shown to decrease the number of deaths from cervical cancer. You and your doctor should discuss your risk for cervical cancer, the pros and cons of the screening tests, at what age to start being screened, and how often to be screened.

The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, the place where a baby grows during pregnancy. The cervix has a small opening that expands during childbirth. It also allows menstrual blood to leave a woman's body. Your health care provider may perform a Pap test during your health checkup to look for changes to the cells of the cervix, including cervical cancer . Other problems with the cervix include: Cervicitis - inflammation of the cervix. This is usually from an infection. Cervical incompetence - This can happen during pregnancy.  The opening of the cervix widens long before the baby is due. Cervical polyps and cysts - abnormal growths on the cervix

What is a cesarean delivery? A cesarean delivery, also called a cesarean section or c-section, is surgery to deliver a baby. The baby is taken out through your abdomen (belly). In the United States, almost one in three babies are born this way. Some cesarean deliveries are planned. Others are emergency cesarean deliveries, which are done when unexpected problems happen during delivery. When is a cesarean delivery needed? You may need a cesarean delivery because: You have health problems , including infection You are carrying more than one baby Your baby is too big Your baby is in the wrong position Your baby's health is in danger Labor is not moving along as it should There are problems with your placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to your baby) Not everyone who has had a cesarean delivery before will need another one next time. You may be able to have a vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC). Talk to your health care provider about what is right for you. How is a cesarean delivery done? Before the surgery, you will be given pain medicine. Depending on your circumstances, you might get: An epidural block, which numbs the lower part of the body through an injection in the spine. A spinal block, which numbs the lower part of the body through an injection directly into the spinal fluid. General anesthesia, which makes you unconscious during the surgery. This is often used during emergency cesarean deliveries. During the surgery, the surgeon will: Make a cut in your abdomen and uterus. The cut is usually horizontal, but in some cases it may be vertical. Open the amniotic sac and take out your baby. Cut the umbilical cord and the placenta. Close the uterus and abdomen with stitches that will later dissolve. What are the risks of a cesarean delivery? A cesarean delivery is relatively safe for you and your baby. But it is still a major surgery, and it carries risks. They may include: Infection Blood loss Blood clots in the legs, pelvic organs, or lungs Injury to surrounding structures, such as the bowel or bladder A reaction to the medicines or anesthesia used Some of these risks do also apply to a vaginal birth. But it does take longer to recover from a cesarean delivery than from a vaginal birth. And having a cesarean delivery can raise the risk of having difficulties with future pregnancies. The more cesarean deliveries you have, the more the risk goes up. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

When you are ready to have your baby, you'll go through labor.  Labor is the process of giving birth. Signs that you might be going into labor include: Contractions that are regular then start to come closer together Leaking fluid or bleeding from the vagina Low, dull backache Abdominal cramps Call your health care provider if you have any of these signs, even if it is before your due date. Preterm labor can start before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. Labor happens in three stages. The first stage begins with contractions. It continues until your cervix has become thinner and dilated (stretched) to about 4 inches wide. The second stage is the active stage, in which you begin to push downward. Crowning is when your baby's scalp comes into view. Shortly afterward, your baby is born. In the third stage, you deliver the placenta. The placenta is the organ that supplied food and oxygen to your baby during pregnancy. Mothers and babies are monitored closely during labor. Most women are able to have a baby through normal vaginal delivery. If there are complications , the baby may need to be delivered surgically by a Cesarean section . NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is chlamydia? Chlamydia is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI). It is caused by bacteria called Chlamydia trachomatis . Anyone can get chlamydia. It often doesn't cause symptoms, so people may not know that they have it. Antibiotics can cure it. But if it's not treated, chlamydia can cause serious health problems. How is chlamydia spread? You can get chlamydia during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with someone who has chlamydia. A pregnant person can also pass chlamydia to the baby during childbirth . If you've had chlamydia and were treated in the past, you can get re-infected if you have unprotected sex with someone who has it. Who is more likely to get chlamydia? Chlamydia is more common in young people, especially young women. You are more likely to get infected with chlamydia if you don't consistently use a condom or if you have multiple partners. What are the symptoms of chlamydia? Chlamydia doesn't usually cause any symptoms. So you may not realize that you have it. But even if you don't have symptoms, you can still pass the infection to others. If you do have symptoms, they may not appear until several weeks after you have sex with someone who has chlamydia. Symptoms in women include: Abnormal vaginal discharge, which may have a strong smell A burning sensation when urinating If the infection spreads, you might get lower abdominal (belly) pain , pain during sex, nausea , and fever . Symptoms in men include: Discharge from your penis A burning sensation when urinating (peeing) Pain and swelling in one or both testicles (although this is less common) If the chlamydia infects the rectum (in men or women), it can cause rectal pain, discharge, and bleeding. How is chlamydia diagnosed? There are lab tests to diagnose chlamydia. Your health care provider may ask you to provide a urine sample. Or your provider may use (or ask you to use) a cotton swab to get a sample from your vagina to test for chlamydia. Who should be tested for chlamydia? You should go to your provider for a test if you have symptoms of chlamydia or if you have a partner who has an STI. Pregnant people should get a test when they go to their first prenatal visit . People at higher risk should get checked for chlamydia every year: Sexually active women 25 and younger Older women who have new or multiple sex partners or a sex partner who has an STI Men who have sex with men (MSM) What other problems can chlamydia cause? In women, an untreated infection can spread to your uterus and fallopian tubes, causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID can cause permanent damage to your reproductive system. This can lead to long-term pelvic pain , infertility , and ectopic pregnancy . Women who have had chlamydia infections more than once are at higher risk of serious reproductive health complications. Men often don't have health problems from chlamydia. Sometimes it can infect the epididymis (the tube that carries sperm). This can cause pain, fever, and, rarely, infertility . Both men and women can develop reactive arthritis because of a chlamydia infection. Reactive arthritis is a type of arthritis that happens as a "reaction" to an infection in the body. Babies born to infected mothers can get eye infections and pneumonia from chlamydia. It may also make it more likely for your baby to be born too early . Untreated chlamydia may also increase your chances of getting or giving HIV . What are the treatments for chlamydia? Antibiotics will cure the infection. You may get a one-time dose of the antibiotics, or you may need to take medicine every day for 7 days. It is important to take all the medicine that your provider prescribed for you. Antibiotics cannot repair any permanent damage that the disease has caused. To prevent spreading the disease to your partner, you should not have sex until the infection has cleared up. If you got a one-time dose of antibiotics, you should wait 7 days after taking the medicine to have sex again. If you have to take medicine every day for 7 days, you should not have sex again until you have finished taking all of the doses of your medicine. It is common to get a repeat infection, so you need to get tested again about three months after treatment. Can chlamydia be prevented? The only sure way to prevent chlamydia is to not have vaginal, anal, or oral sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading chlamydia. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant. If you have an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg grows in the wrong place, outside the uterus, usually in the fallopian tubes. The result is usually a miscarriage . Ectopic pregnancy can be a medical emergency if it ruptures. Signs of ectopic pregnancy include: Abdominal pain Shoulder pain Vaginal bleeding Feeling dizzy or faint Get medical care right away if you have these signs. Doctors use drugs or surgery to remove the ectopic tissue so it doesn't damage your organs. Many women who have had ectopic pregnancies go on to have healthy pregnancies later. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is endometriosis? The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a person is pregnant. The uterus is lined with tissue (endometrium). Endometriosis is a disease in which tissue that is similar to the lining of the uterus grows in other places in your body. These patches of tissue are called "implants," "nodules," or "lesions." They are most often found: On or under the ovaries On the fallopian tubes, which carry egg cells from the ovaries to the uterus Behind the uterus On the tissues that hold the uterus in place On the bowels or bladder In rare cases, the tissue may grow on your lungs or in other parts of your body. What causes endometriosis? The cause of endometriosis is unknown. Who is at risk for endometriosis? Endometriosis can affect anyone who menstruates. Certain factors can raise or lower your risk of getting it. You are at higher risk if: You have a mother, sister, or daughter with endometriosis Your period started before age 11 Your monthly cycles are short (less than 27 days) Your menstrual cycles are heavy and last more than 7 days You have a lower risk if: You have been pregnant before Your periods started late in adolescence You breastfeed your babies What are the symptoms of endometriosis? The main symptoms of endometriosis are: Pelvic pain , which often happens during your period. Infertility Other possible symptoms include: Painful menstrual cramps , which may get worse over time Pain during or after sex Pain in the intestine or lower abdomen Pain with bowel movements or urination, usually during your period Heavy periods Spotting or bleeding between periods Digestive or gastrointestinal symptoms Fatigue or lack of energy How is endometriosis diagnosed? Surgery is the only way to know for sure that you have endometriosis. First, however, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You will have a pelvic exam and may have some imaging tests . The most common surgery to diagnose endometriosis is a laparoscopy . This is a type of surgery that uses a laparoscope, a thin tube with a camera and light. The surgeon inserts the laparoscope through a small cut in the skin near your belly button. Your provider can make a diagnosis based on how the patches of endometriosis look. They may also do a biopsy to get a tissue sample. What are the treatments for endometriosis? There is no cure for endometriosis, but there are treatments for the symptoms. Your provider will work with you to decide which treatments would be best for you. Treatments for endometriosis pain include: Pain relievers , including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen and a prescription medicine specifically for endometriosis. Providers may sometimes prescribe opioids for severe pain. Hormone therapy , which stops the ovaries from making hormones. This may slow the growth of the endometrial tissue and may prevent new areas from growing. Types of hormone therapy include: Birth control pills . Progestin therapy. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) medicines (GnRH agonists and antagonists). These medicines cause a temporary menopause. After your stop taking the medicines, your menstrual periods will start again, and pregnancy is possible. Surgical treatments for severe pain, including procedures to remove the endometriosis patches or cut some nerves in the pelvis. The surgery may be a laparoscopy or major surgery. Treatments for infertility caused by endometriosis include: Laparoscopy to remove the endometriosis patches In vitro fertilization NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). It can cause sores on your genital or rectal area, buttocks, and thighs.  You can get it from having vaginal, anal, or oral sex with someone who has it. The virus can spread even when sores are not present. Mothers can also infect their babies during childbirth. Symptoms of herpes are called outbreaks.  You usually get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. The sores are blisters which break and become painful, and then heal. Sometimes people do not know they have herpes because they have no symptoms or very mild symptoms. The virus can be more serious in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems. Repeat outbreaks are common, especially during the first year. Over time, you get them less often and the symptoms become milder.  The virus stays in your body for life. There are tests that can diagnose genital herpes. There is no cure.  However, medicines can help lessen symptoms, decrease outbreaks, and lower the risk of passing the virus to others. Correct usage of latex condoms can reduce, but not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading herpes. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex.

Genital warts are a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV). The warts usually appear as a small bump or group of bumps in the genital area. They are flesh-colored and can be flat or look bumpy like cauliflower. Some genital warts are so small you cannot see them. In women, the warts usually occur in or around the vagina, on the cervix, or around the anus. In men, genital warts are less common. They may have warts on the tip of the penis, around the anus, or on the scrotum, thigh, or groin. You can get genital warts during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with an infected partner.  Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. HPV vaccines may help prevent some of the HPV infections that cause genital warts. Your health care provider usually diagnoses genital warts by seeing them. The warts might disappear on their own. If not, your health care provider can treat or remove them. HPV stays in your body even after treatment, so warts can come back. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection (STI).  It is most common in young adults. The bacteria that cause gonorrhea can infect the genital tract, mouth, or anus. You can get gonorrhea during vaginal, oral, or anal sex with an infected partner.   A pregnant woman can pass it to her baby during childbirth. Gonorrhea does not always cause symptoms. In men, gonorrhea can cause pain when urinating and discharge from the penis. If untreated, it can cause problems with the prostate and testicles. In women, the early symptoms of gonorrhea often are mild. Later, it can cause bleeding between periods, pain when urinating, and increased discharge from the vagina. If untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease , which causes problems with pregnancy and infertility. Your health care provider will diagnose gonorrhea with lab tests. Treatment is with antibiotics. Treating gonorrhea is becoming more difficult because drug-resistant strains are increasing. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading gonorrhea. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is HPV? Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of related viruses. They can cause warts on different parts of your body. There are more than 200 types. About 40 of them are spread through direct sexual contact with someone who has the virus. They can also spread through other intimate, skin-to-skin contact. Some of these types can cause cancer. There are two categories of sexually transmitted HPV. Low-risk HPV can cause warts on or around your genitals , anus, mouth, or throat. High-risk HPV can cause various cancers: Cervical cancer Anal cancer Some types of oral and throat cancer Vulvar cancer Vaginal cancer Penile cancer Most HPV infections go away on their own and don't cause cancer. But sometimes the infections last longer. When a high-risk HPV infection lasts for many years, it can lead to cell changes. If these changes are not treated, they may get worse over time and become cancer. Who is at risk for HPV infections? HPV infections are very common. Nearly all sexually active people are infected with HPV soon after they become sexually active. What are the symptoms of HPV infections? Some people develop warts from certain low-risk HPV infections, but the other types (including the high-risk types) have no symptoms. If a high-risk HPV infection lasts for many years and causes cell changes, you may have symptoms. You may also have symptoms if those cell changes develop into cancer. Which symptoms you have depends on which part of the body is affected. How are HPV infections diagnosed? Health care providers can usually diagnose warts by looking at them. For women, there are cervical cancer screening tests which can find changes in the cervix that might lead to cancer.  As part of the screening, women may have Pap tests , HPV tests , or both. What are the treatments for HPV infections? An HPV infection itself cannot be treated. There are medicines that you can apply to a wart. If they don't work, your health care provide could freeze, burn, or surgically remove it. There are treatments for the cell changes caused by infection with high-risk HPV. They include medicines that you apply to the area that is affected and various surgical procedures. People who have HPV-related cancers usually get the same types of treatment as people who have cancers that are not caused by HPV. An exception to this is for people who have certain oral and throat cancers. They may have different treatment options. Can HPV infections be prevented? Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Vaccines can protect against several types of HPV, including some that can cause cancer. The vaccines provide the most protection when people get them before they are exposed to the virus. This means that it is best for people to get them before they become sexually active. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A hysterectomy is surgery to remove a woman's uterus or womb. The uterus is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant.  After a hysterectomy, you no longer have menstrual periods and can't become pregnant.  Sometimes the surgery also removes the ovaries and fallopian tubes. If you have both ovaries taken out, you will enter menopause . Your health care provider might recommend a hysterectomy if you have: Fibroids Endometriosis that hasn't been cured by medicine or surgery Uterine prolapse -  when the uterus drops into the vagina Cancer of the uterine , cervix , or ovaries Vaginal bleeding that persists despite treatment Chronic pelvic pain , as a last resort Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Infertility means not being able to become pregnant after a year of trying. If a woman can get pregnant but keeps having miscarriages or stillbirths , that's also called infertility. Infertility is fairly common. After one year of having unprotected sex, about 15% of couples are unable to get pregnant. About a third of the time, infertility can be traced to the woman . In another third of cases, it is because of the man . The rest of the time, it is because of both partners or no cause can be found. There are treatments that are specifically for men or for women. Some involve both partners. Drugs, assisted reproductive technology , and surgery are common treatments. Happily, many couples treated for infertility go on to have babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is a mammogram? A mammogram is an x-ray picture of the breast. Health care providers use mammograms to look for early signs of breast cancer . There are two types of mammograms: screening mammograms and diagnostic mammograms. What is a screening mammogram? A screening mammogram is a mammogram usually done for women who have no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Regular screening mammograms can help reduce the number of deaths from breast cancer among women ages 40 to 74. This is because they can find breast cancer early and treatment can start earlier, maybe before it has spread. But screening mammograms can also have risks. They can sometimes find something that looks abnormal but isn't cancer. This leads to further testing and can cause you anxiety. Sometimes mammograms can miss cancer when it is there. It also exposes you to radiation . You should talk to your provider about the benefits and drawbacks of mammograms. Together, you can decide when to start and how often to have a mammogram. Not much is known about breast cancer risk in transgender people. If you are transgender, talk to your provider about your risk and whether you need screening mammograms. What is a diagnostic mammogram? A diagnostic mammogram is done for people who have a lump or other signs or symptoms of breast cancer. The signs can include breast pain, thickening of the skin of the breast, nipple discharge, or a change in breast size or shape. But these signs can also be caused by a breast condition that is benign (not cancer). A mammogram, along with other tests, can help your provider figure out whether you have cancer. How is a mammogram done? When you have a mammogram, you stand in front of an x-ray machine. The person who takes the x-rays places your breast between two plastic plates. The plates press your breast and make it flat. This may be uncomfortable, but it helps get a clear picture. You will get both breasts x-rayed from the front and from the side. Afterwards, a radiologist (a doctor with special training) will read the mammogram. The doctor will look at the x-ray for early signs of breast cancer or other problems. You will usually get the results within a few weeks, although it depends on the clinic or medical office that you went to. If your results are not normal, you should hear back earlier. Contact your provider or the office where you had the mammogram if you do not receive a report of your results within 30 days. What happens if my mammogram is not normal? An abnormal (not normal) mammogram does not always mean that there is cancer. You will need to have additional mammograms, tests, or exams before your provider can tell for sure. You may also be referred to a breast specialist or a surgeon. But it does not necessarily mean you have cancer or need surgery. You would see one of these doctors because they are experts in diagnosing breast problems.

A mastectomy is surgery to remove a breast or part of a breast. It is usually done to treat breast cancer .  Types of breast surgery include: Total (simple) mastectomy - removal of breast tissue and nipple Modified radical mastectomy - removal of the breast, most of the lymph nodes under the arm, and often the lining over the chest muscles Lumpectomy - surgery to remove the tumor and a small amount of normal tissue around it Which surgery you have depends on the stage of cancer, size of the tumor, size of the breast, and whether the lymph nodes are involved. Many women have breast reconstruction to rebuild the breast after a mastectomy. Sometimes mastectomy is done to prevent breast cancer. Only high-risk patients have this type of surgery. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is menopause? Menopause is the time in your life when you stop having your period and can no longer get pregnant. You have reached menopause when you have not had a period for 12 months. The time leading up to menopause is called the menopausal transition, or perimenopause. This transition usually begins in when you are in your 40s, but sometimes it can start earlier. It can last for several years. The most common age for reaching menopause is between 45 and 55 years old. What is early menopause? Early, or premature menopause happens when your ovaries stop making hormones and periods stop before age 40. This can happen on its own (with no known cause). It can also happen because of surgery to remove the ovaries or uterus . Medical treatments such as chemotherapy or hormone therapy to treat breast cancer may also cause early menopause. A condition called primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) happens when your ovaries stop working normally before you are age 40. But this condition is different from early menopause. If you have POI, you may still have periods, even though they might not come regularly. And you might still be able to get pregnant. What are the symptoms of menopause? During the menopausal transition, your ovaries start to make less of the estrogen and progesterone hormones. The changes in these hormones cause the symptoms of menopause, which can include: A change in your periods; they may be: Irregular, with more or less time in between periods. Shorter or longer. Lighter or heavier. Hot flashes, a sudden warm feeling in your face, neck, and chest. They may cause you to sweat . If they happen at night and cause sweating, they are called night sweats. Trouble sleeping , such as trouble falling asleep or getting back to sleep when you wake up. Over time, a lack of sleep can lead to fatigue and memory problems . Vaginal dryness, which may cause pain or discomfort during sexual intercourse. Mood changes, which can make you feel moody, anxious, or more irritable. Bladder issues, such as urinary incontinence (loss of bladder control) and urinary tract infections (UTIs). You may also have other physical changes which could put you at risk for certain diseases. For example, the loss of estrogen can: Cause you to lose bone density . This can lead to osteoporosis , a condition that causes bones to become weak and break easily. Raise your cholesterol levels and increase your risk of heart disease and stroke . What are the treatments for the symptoms of menopause? You may not need treatment for the symptoms of menopause. But if you do, there are several different types of treatments: Lifestyle changes You may find that you can manage your symptoms with lifestyle changes. Here are some changes that might make you feel better: If you have hot flashes, dress in layers that can be removed at the start of a hot flash. You may want to carry a portable fan to use when you get a hot flash. Avoid alcohol , spicy foods, and caffeine . They can make your menopause symptoms worse. If you smoke, try to quit , not only for hot flashes, but for your overall health. Try to maintain a healthy weight . Being overweight or having obesity can make hot flashes worse. Have good sleep habits . Keep your bedroom dark, quiet, and cool. Get regular exercise . It can help you sleep better, improve your mood, and help lower your risk for many age-related diseases. Lower stress , for example by using relaxation techniques such as meditation, deep breathing, and muscle relaxation exercises. If lifestyle changes are not enough to improve your symptoms, you may want to contact your health care provider. They will talk to you about your symptoms, family and medical history, and preferences. They also can explain the risks and benefits of the treatments. Non-hormone treatments There are various non-hormone treatments for menopause symptoms, such as: Medicines for hot flashes, including certain antidepressants , a medicine just for hot flashes, an antiseizure medicine, and a blood pressure medicine . Some of these medicines may also help with sleep problems. Medicines for urinary incontinence. Medicines to treat or help prevent osteoporosis. Low-dose birth control pills for very heavy bleeding or periods that are close together. Water-based lubricants to treat vaginal dryness. Medicines for painful intercourse that is caused by vaginal changes from menopause. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a type of talk therapy, for trouble sleeping. Hormone treatments Another treatment for menopause symptoms is menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). It may also be called hormone replacement therapy (HRT). This treatment is usually with estrogen or estrogen plus progestin (a type of progesterone that's made in a lab). MHT can be given in pills, skin patches, rings, implants, gels, or creams. It may be used to treat symptoms such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness and to help prevent osteoporosis. Like all medicines, MHT has benefits and risks. Talk with your provider about whether it is safe for you. If you decide to take MHT, your provider may recommend taking the lowest dose that works for the shortest time needed. Supplements, herbs, and "natural" hormone creams There are various products that are marketed for menopause symptoms. They include supplements , herbs , and over-the-counter "natural" hormone creams. There has been research on many of these products. So far, none of them has clearly been shown to be helpful. Also, there is little information on the long-term safety of these products. Some supplements can have harmful side effects or interact with medicines. Check with your provider before you take use any of them.

Menstruation, or period, is normal vaginal bleeding that occurs as part of a woman's monthly cycle. Every month, your body prepares for pregnancy. If no pregnancy occurs, the uterus, or womb, sheds its lining. The menstrual blood is partly blood and partly tissue from inside the uterus. It passes out of the body through the vagina. Periods usually start between age 11 and 14 and continue until menopause at about age 51. They usually last from three to five days. Besides bleeding from the vagina, you may have: Abdominal or pelvic cramping pain Lower back pain Bloating and sore breasts Food cravings Mood swings and irritability Headache and fatigue Premenstrual syndrome , or PMS, is a group of symptoms that start before the period. It can include emotional and physical symptoms. Consult your health care provider if you have big changes in your cycle. They may be signs of other problems that should be treated. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

A miscarriage is an unexpected loss of pregnancy before the 20th week of pregnancy. Most miscarriages happen very early in the pregnancy, often before a woman even knows she is pregnant. Factors that may contribute to miscarriage include: A genetic problem with the fetus Problems with the uterus or cervix Chronic diseases, such as polycystic ovary syndrome Signs of a miscarriage include vaginal spotting, abdominal pain or cramping, and fluid or tissue passing from the vagina. Bleeding can be a symptom of miscarriage, but many women also have it in early pregnancy and don't miscarry. To be sure, contact your health care provider right away if you have bleeding. Women who miscarry early in their pregnancy usually do not need any treatment. In some cases, there is tissue left in the uterus. Doctors use a procedure called a dilatation and curettage (D&C) or medicines to remove the tissue. Counseling may help you cope with your grief. Later, if you do decide to try again, work closely with your health care provider to lower the risks. Many women who have a miscarriage go on to have healthy babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is ovarian cancer? Cancer is a disease in which abnormal cells in the body grow out of control and form a tumor. Ovarian cancer is a cancerous tumor that forms in the tissues of an ovary. The ovaries are a pair of female reproductive glands that make eggs and female hormones . What are the types of ovarian cancer? There are a few different types of ovarian cancer. The most common type is epithelial cancer. It begins in the cells that cover the ovary. There are also two related types of epithelial cancer that can spread to the ovaries: Fallopian tube cancer forms in the tissue lining a fallopian tube. The fallopian tubes are a pair of long, slender tubes on each side of the uterus. The uterus is the female reproductive organ where a baby grows during pregnancy. Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the tissue lining the peritoneum. Your peritoneum is a tissue lining that covers the organs in the abdomen (belly). These two cancers are similar to ovarian cancer, and they have the same treatments. So some medical experts also consider those two types as ovarian cancer. Some other rarer types of ovarian cancer are malignant germ cell tumors and stromal tumors. What causes ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer happens when there are changes (mutations) in the genetic material (DNA). Often, the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Most ovarian cancers are caused by genetic changes that happen during your lifetime. But sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Ovarian cancer that is caused by inherited genetic changes is called hereditary ovarian cancer. There are also certain genetic changes that can raise your risk of ovarian cancer, including changes called BRCA1 and BRCA2 . These two changes also raise your risk of breast and other cancers. Besides genetics, your lifestyle and the environment can affect your risk of ovarian cancer. Who is more likely to develop ovarian cancer? Certain people are more likely to develop ovarian cancer. They include those who: Have a family history of ovarian cancer in a mother, daughter, or sister Have inherited changes in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Have certain other genetic conditions, such as Lynch syndrome Have endometriosis Took hormone replacement therapy Are overweight or have obesity Are tall Are older, especially those who have gone through menopause What are the symptoms of ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer may not cause early signs or symptoms. By the time you do have signs or symptoms, the cancer is often advanced. The signs and symptoms may include: Pain, swelling, or a feeling of pressure in the abdomen or pelvis Sudden or frequent urge to urinate (pee) Trouble eating or feeling full A lump in the pelvic area Gastrointestinal problems, such as gas , bloating, or constipation How is ovarian cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have ovarian cancer, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Will ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had ovarian cancer Will do a physical exam , including a pelvic exam Will likely do imaging tests May do blood tests such as a CA-125 blood test Often the only way to know for sure that you have ovarian cancer is by having a biopsy of the tissue. A biopsy is done during surgery to remove the tumor. What are the treatments for ovarian cancer? Treatments for ovarian cancer may include: Surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible Chemotherapy Targeted therapy , which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Your provider may suggest that you have genetic testing to look for the gene changes that raise the risk for ovarian cancer. Knowing whether or not you have the gene change may help your provider decide on your treatment plan. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. They produce a woman's eggs and make female hormones . Ovarian cysts are fluid-filled sacs in or on an ovary. They usually form during ovulation, when the ovary releases an egg. They are usually harmless and go away by themselves. Most women have them sometime during their lives. Most ovarian cysts are small and don't cause symptoms. Women may not find out that they have them until they have a pelvic exam. If there are symptoms, they may include: Pressure Bloating Swelling Pain in the lower abdomen, on the side where the cyst is If your health care provider finds a cyst, you may be able to wait to see if it gets bigger. You may need surgery if you have pain, are past menopause, or if the cyst does not go away. If a cyst bursts or causes bleeding, you should get medical help right away. Birth control pills can help prevent new cysts. Rarely, ovarian cysts can become cancerous. This risk increases as you get older. A health problem that involves ovarian cysts is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).  Women with PCOS can have high levels of male hormones, irregular or no periods, and small ovarian cysts. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. Women have two ovaries, one on each side of the uterus.  Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. The ovaries produce and store a woman's eggs. During ovulation, an ovary releases an egg. If that egg is fertilized by a sperm, a pregnancy can occur. Ovaries also make the female hormones estrogen and progesterone. When a woman goes through menopause , her ovaries stop making those hormones and releasing eggs. Problems with the ovaries include: Ovarian cancer Ovarian cysts and polycystic ovary syndrome Primary ovarian insufficiency Ovarian torsion, a twisting of the ovary

Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection and inflammation of the uterus, ovaries, and other female reproductive organs. It causes scarring in these organs. This can lead to infertility, ectopic pregnancy, pelvic pain, abscesses, and other serious problems. PID is the most common preventable cause of infertility in the United States. Gonorrhea and chlamydia , two sexually transmitted infections (STIs), are the most common causes of PID. Other bacteria can also cause it. You are at greater risk if you: Are sexually active and younger than 25 Have more than one sex partner Douche Some women have no symptoms. Others have pain in the lower abdomen, fever, smelly vaginal discharge, irregular bleeding, and pain during intercourse or urination. Doctors diagnose PID with a physical exam, lab tests, and imaging tests. Antibiotics can cure PID.  Early treatment is important. Waiting too long increases the risk of infertility. NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Pelvic pain occurs mostly in the lower abdomen area. The pain might be steady, or it might come and go. It can be a sharp and stabbing pain in a specific spot, or a dull pain that is spread out. If the pain is severe, it might get in the way of your daily activities. If you're a woman, you might feel pain during your period . It could also happen when you have sex. Pelvic pain can be a sign that there is a problem with one of the organs in your pelvic area, such as the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, or vagina. If you're a man, the cause could be problem with the prostate . In men and women, it could be a symptom of infection, or a problem with the urinary tract, lower intestines, rectum, muscle, or bone. Some women have more than one cause of pelvic pain at the same time. You might have to have lab, imaging, or other medical tests to find the cause of the pain. The treatment will depend on the cause, how bad the pain is, and how often it occurs. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are painful periods? Menstruation , or period, is normal vaginal bleeding that happens as part of a woman's monthly cycle. Many women have painful periods, also called dysmenorrhea. The pain is most often menstrual cramps, which are a throbbing, cramping pain in your lower abdomen. You may also have other symptoms, such as lower back pain, nausea, diarrhea, and headaches. Period pain is not the same as premenstrual syndrome (PMS). PMS causes many different symptoms, including weight gain, bloating, irritability, and fatigue. PMS often starts one to two weeks before your period starts. What causes painful periods? There are two types of dysmenorrhea: primary and secondary. Each type has different causes. Primary dysmenorrhea is the most common kind of period pain. It is period pain that is not caused by another condition. The cause is usually having too many prostaglandins, which are chemicals that your uterus makes. These chemicals make the muscles of your uterus tighten and relax, and this causes the cramps. The pain can start a day or two before your period. It normally lasts for a few days, though in some women it can last longer. You usually first start having period pain when you are younger, just after you begin getting periods. Often, as you get older, you have less pain. The pain may also get better after you have given birth. Secondary dysmenorrhea often starts later in life. It is caused by conditions that affect your uterus or other reproductive organs, such as endometriosis and uterine fibroids . This kind of pain often gets worse over time. It may begin before your period starts and continue after your period ends. What can I do about period pain? To help ease your period pain, you can try: Using a heating pad or hot water bottle on your lower abdomen Getting some exercise Taking a hot bath Doing relaxation techniques, including yoga and meditation You might also try taking over-the-counter pain relievers such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). NSAIDs include ibuprofen and naproxen. Besides relieving pain, NSAIDs reduce the amount of prostaglandins that your uterus makes and lessen their effects.  This helps to lessen the cramps. You can take NSAIDs when you first have symptoms, or when your period starts. You can keep taking them for a few days. You should not take NSAIDS if you have ulcers or other stomach problems, bleeding problems, or liver disease. You should also not take them if you are allergic to aspirin. Always check with your health care provider if you are not sure whether or not you should take NSAIDs. It may also help to get enough rest and avoid using alcohol and tobacco. When should I get medical help for my period pain? For many women, some pain during your period is normal. However, you should contact your health care provider if: NSAIDs and self-care measures don't help, and the pain interferes with your life Your cramps suddenly get worse You are over 25 and you get severe cramps for the first time You have a fever with your period pain You have the pain even when you are not getting your period How is the cause of severe period pain diagnosed? To diagnose severe period pain, your health care provider will ask you about your medical history and do a pelvic exam. You may also have an ultrasound or other imaging test . If your health care provider thinks you have secondary dysmenorrhea, you might have laparoscopy . It is a surgery that that lets your health care provider look inside your body. What are treatments for severe period pain? If your period pain is primary dysmenorrhea and you need medical treatment, your health care provider might suggest using hormonal birth control, such as the pill, patch, ring, or IUD. Another treatment option might be prescription pain relievers. If you have secondary dysmenorrhea, your treatment depends upon the condition that is causing the problem. In some cases, you may need surgery.

What is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the name for set of symptoms that are related to an imbalance of hormones . PCOS affects the ovaries, as well as many other parts of the body. People with PCOS usually have at least two of these problems: Not ovulating. Normally, your ovaries make the egg that is released each month as part of a healthy menstrual cycle . This is called ovulation. But with PCOS, the egg may not develop as it should, or it may not be released during ovulation. Your periods may be irregular, or you may not have them at all. High levels of androgens. Androgens are hormones that are important for normal male sexual development. Women normally make smaller amounts of androgens. Having higher levels of androgens can cause you to have extra body or facial hair (called hirsutism). Cysts in one or both ovaries. Cysts are growths that are small, fluid-filled sacs. What causes polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? The exact cause of PCOS in unknown. Research has shown that different factors may play a role, including: Genetics . PCOS tends to run in families. Imbalances in androgen levels. Insulin resistance. This is a condition in which your body can't use insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone that helps move blood glucose (sugar) into your cells to give them energy. Insulin resistance can lead to high blood glucose levels. What are the symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? PCOS often develops as young as age 11 or 12, around the time of your first period. But you can develop it later. The symptoms can vary from person to person. Some people have few or even no symptoms. They may not realize they have PCOS until they have trouble getting pregnant. Other people may have more severe symptoms. The symptoms of PCOS may include: Irregular or missed menstrual periods. Too much hair on the face, chest, stomach, or thighs. Obesity , weight gain, or trouble losing weight. Severe acne which may be hard to treat. Oily skin. Patches of thickened dark skin (called acanthosis nigricans). Infertility . PCOS is one of the most common causes of infertility. But many people with PCOS can still get pregnant. What other health problems are linked to polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? PCOS is linked to many other health problems, including: Insulin resistance, which can lead to prediabetes and type 2 diabetes . Heart disease . Having PCOS increases your risk, and this risk goes up as you age. High blood pressure . High LDL ("bad") cholesterol and low HDL ("good") cholesterol . This increases your risk of heart disease . Sleep apnea , a disorder that causes you to repeatedly stop breathing during sleep. Depression and anxiety . Although there are links between PCOS and these conditions, researchers do not know whether: PCOS causes some of these problems Some of these problems cause PCOS, or There are other conditions that cause both PCOS and these other health problems Not everyone who has PCOS will have all these problems. However, you and your health care provider may want to monitor your health for signs of them, so they can be treated early. How is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) diagnosed? There is no specific test for PCOS. To find out if you have PCOS, your provider: Will do a physical exam, which will include looking for the physical signs of PCOS. Will ask about your medical history and family health history. May do a pelvic exam to check for signs of extra male hormones and to see if your ovaries are enlarged or swollen. May order a pelvic ultrasound to look for cysts on your ovaries and check the thickness of your endometrium (the lining of your uterus, or womb). May order blood tests, including tests to check your hormone levels. What are the treatments for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? There is no cure for PCOS, but treatments can help you manage your symptoms. The treatments may include: Lifestyle changes, which can help reduce many symptoms. They can also lower your risk for or help manage related health problems. These changes include: Maintaining a healthy weight Getting regular physical activity Eating healthy foods Medicines: Hormonal birth control , such as pills, shots, and IUDs, can make your period more regular. They may also help remove acne and extra facial and body hair. But you would only use them if you don't want to get pregnant. Anti-androgen medicines, which block the effect of androgens. This can help reduce hair loss on your head, the growth of facial and body hair, and acne. Providers do use them to help with these symptoms, but anti-androgen medicines are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat PCOS. These medicines can cause problems during pregnancy. Your provider may have you take them with birth control (to prevent pregnancy). Insulin-sensitizing medicines, which are medicines that are used to treat type 2 diabetes. They improve insulin resistance and keep your blood glucose levels steady. They may also lower your androgen levels. They are not approved by the FDA to treat PCOS. But they may help with your symptoms. Medicines for acne. These medicines come in pills, creams, or gels. Treatments for hair removal, such as facial hair removal creams, laser hair removal, and electrolysis. Fertility treatments if you are having trouble getting pregnant. They include medicines and procedures such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) .

You're going to have a baby! It's an exciting time, but it can also feel a bit overwhelming.  You may have a lot of questions, including what you can do to give your baby a healthy start. To keep you and your baby healthy during pregnancy, it is important to: Have regular visits with your health care provider. These prenatal care visits help make sure that you and your baby are healthy. And if there are any health problems, your provider can find them early. Getting treatment right away can cure many problems and prevent others. Eat healthy and drink plenty of water. Good nutrition during pregnancy includes eating a variety of: Fruits Vegetables Whole grains Lean meats or other protein sources Low-fat dairy products Take prenatal vitamins. During pregnancy, you need higher amounts of certain vitamins and minerals, such as folic acid and iron . Be careful with medicines. Always check with your provider before you start or stop any medicine . This includes over-the-counter medicines and dietary or herbal supplements. Stay active. Physical activity can help you stay strong, feel and sleep better, and prepare your body for birth. Check with your provider about which types of activities are right for you. Avoid substances that could hurt your baby , including alcohol, drugs, and tobacco . Your body will keep changing as your baby grows . It can be hard to know whether a new symptom is normal or could be a sign of a problem . Check with your provider if something is bothering or worrying you.

What is premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? Premenstrual syndrome, or PMS, is a group of physical and emotional symptoms that start one to two weeks before your period . Most women have at least some symptoms of PMS, and the symptoms go away after their periods start. The symptoms may range from mild to severe. What is premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD)? Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a severe type of PMS. With PMDD, the symptoms are severe enough to interfere with your life.  PMDD much less common than PMS. What causes premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? Researchers don't know exactly what causes PMS. Changes in hormone levels during the menstrual cycle may play a role. These changing hormone levels may affect some women more than others. What are the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? PMS symptoms are different for everyone. You may get physical symptoms, emotional symptoms, or both. Your symptoms may also change throughout your life. Physical symptoms may include: Breast swelling and tenderness Acne Bloating and weight gain Headache Joint pain Backache Constipation or diarrhea Food cravings Emotional symptoms may include: Irritability Mood swings Crying spells Depression Anxiety Sleeping too much or too little Trouble with concentration and memory Less interest in sex How is premenstrual syndrome (PMS) diagnosed? You may wish to see your health care provider if your symptoms bother you or affect your daily life. There is no single test for PMS. Your provider will talk with you about your symptoms, including when they happen and how much they affect your life.  To be diagnosed with PMS, your symptoms must: Happen in the five days before your period for at least three menstrual cycles in a row End within four days after your period starts Keep you from enjoying or doing some of your normal activities Your provider may wish to do tests to rule out other conditions which may cause similar symptoms. What are the treatments for premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? No single PMS treatment works for everyone. If your symptoms are not severe, you may be able to manage them with: Over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen, aspirin, or naproxen, to help ease cramps, headaches, backaches, and breast tenderness Getting regular exercise Getting enough sleep Eating healthy foods Avoiding salt , caffeine , sugar, and alcohol in the two weeks before your period Some studies have shown that certain vitamins may help with some symptoms of PMS. They include calcium and vitamin B6 . Some women take certain herbal supplements for PMS symptoms. But there is not enough evidence to prove that supplements are effective for PMS. Check with your provider before taking any vitamins or supplements. If you are not able to manage your PMS symptoms, your provider may suggest prescription medicines. These medicines may also be used to treat PMDD. They include: Hormonal birth control , which may help with the physical symptoms of PMS. But sometimes they may make the emotional symptoms worse. You may need to try several different types of birth control before you find the right one. Antidepressants , such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which may help with emotional symptoms. Diuretics ("water pills") to reduce symptoms of bloating and breast tenderness. Anti-anxiety medicine to ease symptoms of anxiety. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Preterm labor is labor that starts before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. It can lead to premature birth. Premature babies may face serious health risks. Symptoms of preterm labor include: Contractions every 10 minutes or more often Leaking fluid or bleeding from the vagina Feeling of pressure in the pelvis Low, dull backache Cramps that feel like menstrual cramps Abdominal cramps with or without diarrhea If you think you might be having preterm labor, contact your health care provider. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI), also known as premature ovarian failure, happens when a woman's ovaries stop working normally before she is 40. Many women naturally experience reduced fertility when they are about 40 years old. They may start getting irregular menstrual periods as they transition to menopause. For women with POI, irregular periods and reduced fertility start before the age of 40. Sometimes it can start as early as the teenage years. POI is different from premature menopause . With premature menopause, your periods stop before age 40. You can no longer get pregnant. The cause can be natural or it can be a disease, surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. With POI, some women still have occasional periods. They may even get pregnant.  In most cases of POI, the cause is unknown. What causes primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? In about 90% of cases, the exact cause of POI is unknown. Research shows that POI is related to problems with the follicles. Follicles are small sacs in your ovaries. Your eggs grow and mature inside them. One type of follicle problem is that you run out of working follicles earlier than normal. Another is that the follicles are not working properly. In most cases, the cause of the follicle problem is unknown. But sometimes the cause may be: Genetic disorders such as Fragile X syndrome and Turner syndrome A low number of follicles Autoimmune diseases, including thyroiditis and Addison disease Chemotherapy or radiation therapy Metabolic disorders Toxins, such as cigarette smoke , chemicals, and pesticides Who is at risk for primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Certain factors can raise a woman's risk of POI: Family history. Women who have a mother or sister with POI are more likely to have it. Genes. Some changes to genes and genetic conditions put women at higher risk for POI. For example, women Fragile X syndrome or Turner syndrome are at higher risk. Certain diseases, such as autoimmune diseases and viral infections Cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy Age. Younger women can get POI, but it becomes more common between the ages of 35-40. What are the symptoms of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? The first sign of POI is usually irregular or missed periods. Later symptoms may be similar to those of natural menopause: Hot flashes Night sweats Irritability Poor concentration Decreased sex drive Pain during sex Vaginal dryness For many women with POI, trouble getting pregnant or infertility is the reason they go to their health care provider. What other problems can primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) cause? Since POI causes you to have lower levels of certain hormones, you are at greater risk for other health conditions, including: Anxiety and depression. Hormonal changes caused by POI can contribute to anxiety or lead to depression . Dry eye syndrome and eye surface disease. Some women with POI have one of these eye conditions. Both can cause discomfort and may lead to blurred vision. If not treated, these conditions can cause permanent eye damage. Heart disease. Lower levels of estrogen can affect the muscles lining the arteries and can increase the buildup of cholesterol in the arteries. These factors increase your risk of atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries). Infertility. Low thyroid function. This problem also is called hypothyroidism . The thyroid is a gland that makes hormones that control your body's metabolism and energy level. Low levels thyroid hormones can affect your metabolism and can cause very low energy, mental sluggishness, and other symptoms. Osteoporosis. The hormone estrogen helps keep bones strong. Without enough estrogen, women with POI often develop osteoporosis . It is a bone disease that causes weak, brittle bones that are more likely to break . How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) diagnosed? To diagnose POI, your health care provider may do: A medical history, including asking whether you have relatives with POI A pregnancy test, to make sure that you are not pregnant A physical exam, to look for signs of other disorders which could be causing your symptoms Blood tests, to check for certain hormone levels. You may also have a blood test to do a chromosome analysis. A chromosome is the part of a cell that contains genetic information. A pelvic ultrasound, to see whether or not the ovaries are enlarged or have multiple follicles How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) treated? Currently, there is no proven treatment to restore normal function to a woman's ovaries.  But there are treatments for some of the symptoms of POI. There are also ways to lower your health risks and treat the conditions that POI can cause: Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). HRT is the most common treatment. It gives your body the estrogen and other hormones that your ovaries are not making. HRT improves sexual health and decreases the risks for heart disease and osteoporosis. You usually take it until about age 50; that's about the age when menopause usually begins. Calcium and vitamin D supplements. Because women with POI are at higher risk for osteoporosis, you should take calcium and vitamin D every day. In vitro fertilization (IVF). If you have POI and you wish to become pregnant, you may consider trying IVF . Regular physical activity and a healthy body weight. Getting regular exercise and controlling your weight can lower your risk for osteoporosis and heart disease. Treatments for associated conditions. If you have a condition that is related to POI, it is important to treat that as well. Treatments may involve medicines and hormones. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy . If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start. Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides. Use good hygiene , including handwashing. If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures.

Sexuality is a big part of being human. Love, affection and sexual intimacy all play a role in healthy relationships. They also contribute to your sense of well-being. A number of disorders can affect the ability to have or enjoy sex  in both men and women . Factors that can affect sexual health include: Fear of unplanned pregnancy Concerns about infertility Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Chronic diseases such as cancer or heart disease Medicines that affect sexual desire or performance

What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are infections that are passed from one person to another through sexual contact. They are usually spread during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. But sometimes they can spread through other sexual contact involving the penis, vagina, mouth, or anus. This is because some STIs, like herpes and HPV, are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Some STIs can be passed from a pregnant person to the baby, either during pregnancy or when giving birth. Other ways that some STIs may be spread include during breastfeeding , through blood transfusions , or by sharing needles. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis What causes sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs can be caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites . Who is affected by sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Most STIs affect both men and women, but in many cases the health problems they cause can be more severe for 
women. If an STI is passed to a baby, it can cause serious health problems. What are the symptoms of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs don't always cause symptoms or may only cause mild symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection and not know it. And even without symptoms, STIs can still be harmful and may be passed on during sex. If there are symptoms, they could include: Unusual discharge from the penis or vagina Sores or warts on the genital area Painful or frequent urination (peeing) Itching and redness in the genital area Blisters or sores in or around the mouth Abnormal vaginal odor Anal itching, soreness, or bleeding Abdominal (belly) pain Fever How are sexually transmitted infections (STIs) diagnosed? If you are sexually active, you should talk to your health care provider about your risk for STIs and whether you need to be tested. This is especially important since many STIs do not usually cause symptoms. Some STIs may be diagnosed during a physical exam or through STI testing . Some tests involve a microscopic examination of a sore or fluid swabbed from the vagina, penis, or anus. Blood tests can diagnose other types of STIs. What are the treatments for sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Antibiotics can treat STIs that are caused by bacteria or parasites. There is no cure for STIs caused by viruses, but antiviral medicines can often help with the symptoms and lower your risk of spreading the infection. It's important to get treatment if you have an STI. Some types of STIs can cause serious health problems if they are not treated. Can sexually transmitted infections (STIs) be prevented? The surest way to protect yourself against STIs is to not have sex. If you do decide to have sex, you can lower your risk of getting an STI by: Having you and your partner tested for STIs before having sex. Using a condom every time you have sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading STIs. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Reducing your number of sex partners. You might even consider "mutual monogamy" with just one partner. This means that you agree to be sexually active only with them, and they agree to be sexually active only with you. But first you should both get tested to make sure that you don't already have an STI. Getting vaccinated against HPV and hepatitis B .

There are many problems that can keep a woman from enjoying sex. They include: Lack of sexual desire Inability to become aroused Lack of orgasm, or sexual climax Painful intercourse These problems may have physical or psychological causes. Physical causes may include conditions like diabetes, heart disease, nerve disorders, or hormone problems. Some drugs can also affect desire and function. Psychological causes may include work-related stress and anxiety. They may also include depression or concerns about marriage or relationship problems. For some women, the problem results from past sexual trauma. Occasional problems with sexual function are common. If problems last more than a few months or cause distress for you or your partner, you should see your health care provider.

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by bacteria. It infects the genital area, lips, mouth, or anus of both men and women. You usually get syphilis from sexual contact with someone who has it. It can also pass from mother to baby during pregnancy. The early stage of syphilis usually causes a single, small, painless sore. Sometimes it causes swelling in nearby lymph nodes. If you do not treat it, syphilis usually causes a non-itchy skin rash, often on your hands and feet. Many people do not notice symptoms for years. Symptoms can go away and come back. The sores caused by syphilis make it easier to get or give someone HIV during sex. If you are pregnant, syphilis can cause complications, or you could lose your baby. In rare cases, syphilis causes serious health problems and even death. Syphilis is easy to cure with antibiotics if you catch it early. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading syphilis. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a parasite. It spreads from person to person during sex. Many people do not have any symptoms. If you do get symptoms, they usually happen within 5 to 28 days after being infected. It can cause vaginitis in women. Symptoms include: Yellow-green or gray discharge from the vagina Discomfort during sex Vaginal odor Painful urination Itching burning, and soreness of the vagina and vulva Most men do not have symptoms. If they do, they may have: Itching or irritation inside the penis Burning after urination or ejaculation Discharge from the penis Trichomoniasis can increase the risk of getting or spreading other sexually transmitted infections. Pregnant women with trichomoniasis are more likely to give birth too early , and their babies are more likely have a low birth weight . Lab tests can tell if you have the infection. Treatment is with antibiotics . If you are infected, you and your partner must be treated. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading trichomoniasis. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Tubal ligation (getting your "tubes tied") is a type of surgery. It prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is a permanent form of birth control , and is effective right away. The surgery cuts, ties, or seals the fallopian tubes. This blocks the path between the ovaries and the uterus. The sperm cannot reach the egg to fertilize it, and the egg cannot reach the uterus. You get the surgery in a hospital or outpatient surgical center. It usually takes about 30 minutes. Almost all women go home the same day. They can return to most normal activities within a few days. Tubal ligation can sometimes be reversed. The reversal is major surgery, and does not always work.

The uterus , or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a women is pregnant. There are different types of uterine cancer. The most common type starts in the endometrium, the lining of the uterus. This type is also called endometrial cancer. The symptoms of uterine cancer include: Abnormal vaginal bleeding or discharge Trouble urinating Pelvic pain Pain during intercourse Uterine cancer usually happens after menopause. It is more common in women who have obesity. You also have a higher risk if you took estrogen-only hormone replacement therapy (menopausal hormone therapy) for many years. Tests to find uterine cancer include a pelvic exam, imaging tests, and a biopsy. The most common treatment is a hysterectomy , which is surgery to remove the uterus. Sometimes the surgery also removes the ovaries and fallopian tubes. Other treatments include hormone therapy, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Some women get more than one type of treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant. The first sign of a problem with the uterus may be bleeding between periods or after sex. Causes can include hormones, thyroid problems, fibroids , polyps, cancer , infection, or pregnancy. Treatment depends on the cause. Sometimes birth control pills treat hormonal imbalances. If a thyroid problem is the cause, treating it may also stop the bleeding. If you have cancer or hyperplasia, an overgrowth of normal cells in the uterus, you may need surgery. With two other uterine problems, tissue that normally lines the uterus grows where it is not supposed to.  In endometriosis , it grows outside the uterus.  In adenomyosis, it grows in the uterus's outside walls. Pain medicine may help. Other treatments include hormones and surgery.

Uterine fibroids are the most common benign tumors in women of childbearing age. Fibroids are made of muscle cells and other tissues that grow in and around the wall of the uterus, or womb. The cause of fibroids is unknown. Risk factors include being African American or being overweight. Many women with fibroids have no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they may include: Heavy or painful periods or bleeding between periods Feeling "full" in the lower abdomen Urinating often Pain during sex Lower back pain Reproductive problems, such as infertility, multiple miscarriages or early labor Your health care provider may find fibroids during a gynecological exam or by using imaging tests.  Treatment includes drugs that can slow or stop their growth, or surgery.  If you have no symptoms, you may not even need treatment. Many women with fibroids can get pregnant naturally. For those who cannot, infertility treatments may help. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Menstruation, or period, is a woman's monthly bleeding. Abnormal vaginal bleeding is different from normal menstrual periods. It could be bleeding that is between periods, is very heavy, or lasts much longer than usual. It also includes bleeding that happens before puberty or after menopause. Causes can include: Uterine fibroids or polyps Hormone problems Hormone pills, such as birth control pills and hormone replacement therapy (menopausal hormone therapy) Cancer of the cervix , ovaries , uterus or vagina Thyroid problems Bleeding during pregnancy can have several different causes. It is not always serious, but to be safe you should contact your health care provider right away. Pelvic exams, blood tests, imaging tests , and other procedures can help your health care provider diagnose the problem. Treatment depends on the cause. Treatments may include medicines, hormones, and surgery.

Vaginal cancer is a rare type of cancer. It is more common in women 60 and older. You are also more likely to get it if you have had a human papillomavirus ( HPV ) infection or if your mother took diethylstilbestrol (DES) when she was pregnant. Doctors prescribed DES in the 1950's to prevent miscarriages. You are also at higher risk if you have had abnormal cells in the vagina, cervix, or uterus. It often doesn't have early symptoms. However, see your doctor if you notice: Bleeding that is not your period A vaginal lump Pelvic pain A Pap test can find abnormal cells that may be cancer. Vaginal cancer can often be cured in its early stages. Treatment might include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Vaginal problems are some of the most common reasons women go to the doctor. They may have symptoms such as: Itching Burning Pain Abnormal bleeding Discharge One common problem is vaginitis , an inflammation of the vagina.  Other problems that affect the vagina include sexually transmitted infections (STIs), vaginal cancer , and vulvar cancer . Treatment of vaginal problems depends on the cause.

What is vaginitis? Vaginitis, also called vulvovaginitis, is an inflammation or infection of the vagina. It can also affect the vulva, which is the external part of a woman's genitals. Vaginitis can cause itching, pain, discharge, and odor. Vaginitis is common, especially in women in their reproductive years.  It usually happens when there is a change in the balance of bacteria or yeast that are normally found in your vagina. There are different types of vaginitis, and they have different causes, symptoms, and treatments. What  causes vaginitis? Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is the most common vaginal infection in women ages 15-44. It happens when there is an imbalance between the "good" and "harmful" bacteria that are normally found in a woman's vagina. Many things can change the balance of bacteria, including: Taking antibiotics Douching Using an intrauterine device (IUD) Having unprotected sex with a new partner Having many sexual partners Yeast infections (candidiasis) happen when too much candida grows in the vagina. Candida is the scientific name for yeast. It is a fungus that lives almost everywhere, including in your body. You may have too much growing in the vagina because of: Antibiotics Pregnancy Diabetes, especially if it is not well-controlled Corticosteroid medicines Trichomoniasis can also cause vaginitis. Trichomoniasis is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI). It is caused by a parasite. You can also have vaginitis if you are allergic or sensitive to certain products that you use. Examples include vaginal sprays, douches, spermicides, soaps, detergents, or fabric softeners. They can cause burning, itching, and discharge. Hormonal changes can also cause vaginal irritation. Examples are when you are pregnant or breastfeeding, or when you have gone through menopause. Sometimes you can have more than one cause of vaginitis at the same time. What are the symptoms of vaginitis? The symptoms of vaginitis depend on which type you have. With BV, you may not have symptoms. You could have a thin white or gray vaginal discharge. There may be an odor, such as a strong fish-like odor, especially after sex. Yeast infections produce a thick, white discharge from the vagina that can look like cottage cheese. The discharge can be watery and often has no smell. Yeast infections usually cause the vagina and vulva to become itchy and red. You may not have symptoms when you have trichomoniasis. If you do have them, they include itching, burning, and soreness of the vagina and vulva. You may have burning during urination. You could also have gray-green discharge, which may smell bad. How is the cause of vaginitis diagnosed? To find out the cause of your symptoms, your health care provider may: Ask you about your medical history Do a pelvic exam Look for vaginal discharge, noting its color, qualities, and any odor Study a sample of your vaginal fluid under a microscope In some cases, you may need more tests. What are the treatments for vaginitis? The treatment depends on which type of vaginitis you have. BV is treatable with antibiotics . You may get pills to swallow, or cream or gel that you put in your vagina. During treatment, you should use a condom during sex or not have sex at all. Yeast infections are usually treated with a cream or with medicine that you put inside your vagina. You can buy over-the-counter treatments for yeast infections, but you need to be sure that you do have a yeast infection and not another type of vaginitis. See your health care provider if this is the first time you have had symptoms. Even if you have had yeast infections before, it is a good idea to call your health care provider before using an over-the-counter treatment. The treatment for trichomoniasis is usually a single-dose antibiotic. Both you and your partner(s) should be treated, to prevent spreading the infection to others and to keep from getting it again. If your vaginitis is due to an allergy or sensitivity to a product, you need to figure out which product is causing the problem. It could be a product that you started using recently. Once you figure it out, you should stop using the product. If the cause of your vaginitis is a hormonal change, your health care provider may give you estrogen cream to help with your symptoms. Can vaginitis cause other health problems? It is important to treat BV and trichomoniasis, because having either of them can increase your risk for getting HIV or another STI. If you are pregnant, BV or trichomoniasis can increase your risk for preterm labor and preterm birth. Can vaginitis be prevented? To help prevent vaginitis: Do not douche or use vaginal sprays. Use a latex condom when having sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Avoid clothes that hold in heat and moisture. Wear cotton underwear.

Vulvar cancer is a rare type of cancer. It forms in a woman's external genitals, called the vulva. The cancer usually grows slowly over several years. First, precancerous cells grow on vulvar skin. This is called vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), or dysplasia. Not all VIN cases turn into cancer, but it is best to treat it early. Often, vulvar cancer doesn't cause symptoms at first. However, see your doctor for testing if you notice: A lump in the vulva Vulvar itching or tenderness Bleeding that is not your period Changes in the vulvar skin, such as color changes or growths that look like a wart or ulcer You are at greater risk if you've had a human papillomavirus (HPV) infection or have a history of genital warts. Your health care provider diagnoses vulvar cancer with a physical exam and a biopsy. Treatment varies, depending on your overall health and how advanced the cancer is. It might include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or biologic therapy. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The vulva is the external part of a woman's genitals. Some problems you can have with the vulvar area include: Vaginitis or vulvovaginitis, swelling or infection of the vulva and vagina Skin problems due to allergy Vulvar cancer Vulvodynia, or vulvar pain Symptoms may include redness, itching, pain, or cracks in the skin. Treatment depends on the cause.

Candida is the scientific name for yeast. It is a fungus that lives almost everywhere, including in your body. Usually, your immune system keeps yeast under control. If you are sick or taking antibiotics, it can multiply and cause an infection. Yeast infections affect different parts of the body in different ways: Thrush is a yeast infection that causes white patches in your mouth Candida esophagitis is thrush that spreads to your esophagus, the tube that takes food from your mouth to your stomach. It can make it hard or painful to swallow. Women can get vaginal yeast infections, causing vaginitis Yeast infections of the skin cause itching and rashes Yeast infections in your bloodstream can be life-threatening Antifungal medicines get rid of yeast infections in most people. If you have a weak immune system, treatment might be more difficult.

Assisted reproductive technology (ART) is used to treat infertility . It includes fertility treatments that handle both eggs and sperm. It works by removing eggs from the ovaries. The eggs are then mixed with sperm to make embryos. The embryos are then put back in the parent's body. In vitro fertilization (IVF) is the most common and effective type of ART. ART procedures sometimes use donor eggs, donor sperm, or previously frozen embryos. It may also involve a surrogate or gestational carrier. A surrogate is a person who becomes pregnant with sperm from one partner of the couple. A gestational carrier becomes pregnant with an egg from one partner and sperm from the other partner. The most common complication of ART is a multiple pregnancy . It can be prevented or minimized by limiting the number of embryos that are put into the parent's body.

What is birth control? Birth control, also known as contraception, is the use of medicines, devices, or surgery to prevent pregnancy. There are many different types. Some are reversible, while others are permanent. Some types can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs). What are the different types of birth control? There are several different types of birth control, and they work in different ways: Barrier methods Male condom A thin sheath that covers the penis to collect sperm and prevent it from entering the woman's body. Condoms that are made of latex and polyurethane can help prevent STIs. Female condom A thin, flexible plastic pouch. Part of the condom is inserted into the vagina before intercourse to prevent sperm from entering the uterus. The uterus, or womb, is the place where the baby grows during pregnancy. Female condoms can also help prevent STIs. Contraceptive sponge A small sponge that you put into the vagina to cover the cervix (the opening of the uterus). The sponge also contains a spermicide to kill sperm. Spermicide A substance that can kill sperm cells. It comes in a foam, jelly, cream, suppository, or film. You put it into the vagina near the uterus. Spermicide can be used alone or with a diaphragm or cervical cap. Diaphragm and cervical cap Cups that are placed inside the vagina to cover the cervix. They may be used with spermicide. They come in different sizes, so it's important to see your health care provider to figure out which size works best for you. Hormonal methods Oral contraceptives ("the pill") Pills that a woman takes every day. They may contain only progestin or both progestin and estrogen. Contraceptive patch A patch that a woman puts on her skin each week. The patch releases hormones into the bloodstream. Vaginal ring A thin, flexible ring. The woman inserts the ring into the vagina, where it continually releases hormones for three weeks. She takes it out for the fourth week. After that week, she puts in a new ring. Injectable birth control An injection of a hormone that a woman gets once every three months. This is done in your provider's office. Implant A single, thin rod that a provider inserts under the skin of a women's upper arm.  It is done in your provider's office. The implant can last for four years. Long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) Intrauterine device (IUD) A small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the uterus. This is done in the provider's office. IUDs can last from 3 to 10 years. There are two types: hormonal IUDs and copper IUDs. Sterilization Tubal ligation A surgery that prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is permanent. Vasectomy A surgery that prevents a man from getting someone pregnant. It is permanent. What are some other forms of pregnancy prevention? There are some types of pregnancy prevention that do not involve medicines, devices, or surgery: Other forms of pregnancy prevention Fertility awareness-based methods They are also called natural rhythm methods. They involve tracking the woman's fertility cycle and avoiding sex or using barrier methods on the days when she is most likely to get pregnant. This method may have higher pregnancy rates than other types. Lactational amenorrhea method (LAM) A form of natural birth control for breastfeeding mothers. It relies on the new mother feeding her baby only breastmilk for up to six months and having no periods or spotting during that time. Withdrawal During intercourse, the penis is pulled out of the vagina before ejaculation. The goal is to keep sperm from entering the vagina . But the sperm can leak out before the penis is pulled out, so this method has higher pregnancy rates than other types. What is emergency contraception? Emergency contraception is not a regular method of birth control. But it can be used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected intercourse or if a condom breaks. There are two types: Copper IUD, which is a small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse. Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs), which are hormonal pills which the woman takes as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse. What else should I know about birth control? When deciding which birth control type is right for you, there are many different factors to consider: Do you want to have children someday? How soon? Do you have any health conditions? How often do you have sex? How many sex partners do you have? Do you also need protection from HIV and other STIs? How well does the birth control method work? Are there any side effects? Will you be able to use it correctly every time? How much does it cost? Your provider can answer your questions about birth control to help you select the best type for you. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is chlamydia? Chlamydia is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI). It is caused by bacteria called Chlamydia trachomatis . Anyone can get chlamydia. It often doesn't cause symptoms, so people may not know that they have it. Antibiotics can cure it. But if it's not treated, chlamydia can cause serious health problems. How is chlamydia spread? You can get chlamydia during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with someone who has chlamydia. A pregnant person can also pass chlamydia to the baby during childbirth . If you've had chlamydia and were treated in the past, you can get re-infected if you have unprotected sex with someone who has it. Who is more likely to get chlamydia? Chlamydia is more common in young people, especially young women. You are more likely to get infected with chlamydia if you don't consistently use a condom or if you have multiple partners. What are the symptoms of chlamydia? Chlamydia doesn't usually cause any symptoms. So you may not realize that you have it. But even if you don't have symptoms, you can still pass the infection to others. If you do have symptoms, they may not appear until several weeks after you have sex with someone who has chlamydia. Symptoms in women include: Abnormal vaginal discharge, which may have a strong smell A burning sensation when urinating If the infection spreads, you might get lower abdominal (belly) pain , pain during sex, nausea , and fever . Symptoms in men include: Discharge from your penis A burning sensation when urinating (peeing) Pain and swelling in one or both testicles (although this is less common) If the chlamydia infects the rectum (in men or women), it can cause rectal pain, discharge, and bleeding. How is chlamydia diagnosed? There are lab tests to diagnose chlamydia. Your health care provider may ask you to provide a urine sample. Or your provider may use (or ask you to use) a cotton swab to get a sample from your vagina to test for chlamydia. Who should be tested for chlamydia? You should go to your provider for a test if you have symptoms of chlamydia or if you have a partner who has an STI. Pregnant people should get a test when they go to their first prenatal visit . People at higher risk should get checked for chlamydia every year: Sexually active women 25 and younger Older women who have new or multiple sex partners or a sex partner who has an STI Men who have sex with men (MSM) What other problems can chlamydia cause? In women, an untreated infection can spread to your uterus and fallopian tubes, causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID can cause permanent damage to your reproductive system. This can lead to long-term pelvic pain , infertility , and ectopic pregnancy . Women who have had chlamydia infections more than once are at higher risk of serious reproductive health complications. Men often don't have health problems from chlamydia. Sometimes it can infect the epididymis (the tube that carries sperm). This can cause pain, fever, and, rarely, infertility . Both men and women can develop reactive arthritis because of a chlamydia infection. Reactive arthritis is a type of arthritis that happens as a "reaction" to an infection in the body. Babies born to infected mothers can get eye infections and pneumonia from chlamydia. It may also make it more likely for your baby to be born too early . Untreated chlamydia may also increase your chances of getting or giving HIV . What are the treatments for chlamydia? Antibiotics will cure the infection. You may get a one-time dose of the antibiotics, or you may need to take medicine every day for 7 days. It is important to take all the medicine that your provider prescribed for you. Antibiotics cannot repair any permanent damage that the disease has caused. To prevent spreading the disease to your partner, you should not have sex until the infection has cleared up. If you got a one-time dose of antibiotics, you should wait 7 days after taking the medicine to have sex again. If you have to take medicine every day for 7 days, you should not have sex again until you have finished taking all of the doses of your medicine. It is common to get a repeat infection, so you need to get tested again about three months after treatment. Can chlamydia be prevented? The only sure way to prevent chlamydia is to not have vaginal, anal, or oral sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading chlamydia. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is circumcision? Circumcision is a surgical procedure to remove the foreskin from the penis. The foreskin is the loose skin that covers the tip of the penis. In the United States, circumcision is often done before a new baby leaves the hospital. What should I consider when deciding whether to have my baby circumcised? As parents, it is your decision whether to have your baby circumcised. When making your decision, you should consider your own religious, cultural, and personal preferences, as well as the medical benefits and risks. You can discuss these with your baby's health care provider before you make a decision. What are the medical benefits of circumcision? The possible medical benefits of circumcision include: A lower risk of HIV and some other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). A slightly lower risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs) during the first year of life and penile cancer later in life. However, these conditions are rare in all males (circumcised or not). Prevention of certain penile problems, such as foreskin infections and phimosis, a condition in which the foreskin can't be retracted (pulled back). Easier hygiene. What are the risks of circumcision? The risks of circumcision include: A low risk of bleeding, infection, or scarring. A very low risk of having too much or not enough skin cut off. Pain. You can ask the health care provider to put a numbing medicine on your baby's penis to lessen the pain. These risks are higher when circumcision is performed on older babies, boys, and men. What else do I need to know about circumcision? Premature babies and babies born with health problems should not be circumcised until they are healthy. If have your baby circumcised, ask their provider how to care for the penis as it heals. If your baby does not get circumcised, their provider can teach you how to keep your baby's penis clean. It's important to know that a newborn's foreskin may not retract completely. Over time, it retracts on its own.

What is the prostate? The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. What is an enlarged prostate (BPH)? An enlarged prostate is when your prostate gland becomes larger than normal. It's also called benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH for short. Benign means not cancer. And hyperplasia means too much cell growth. BPH isn't cancer and it doesn't increase your risk of getting prostate cancer . Usually, the prostate gland continues to grow during adult life. That's why BPH is the most common prostate condition in people over age 50. As the prostate gets bigger, it may press against the bladder and pinch the urethra. This can slow or block the flow of urine out of your bladder. Over time, the bladder muscle may become weak from trying to pass urine through a narrow urethra.  When this happens, your bladder may not empty completely when you urinate. A narrowed urethra and weak bladder cause many of the urinary problems you may have with BPH. What causes an enlarged prostate (BPH)? Researchers aren't sure why the prostate keeps growing. Some researchers think changes in hormones with aging may cause the prostate to get bigger. Who is more likely to develop BPH? You're more likely to develop BPH if you: Are age 40 or older. The chance of getting BPH increases as you get older. Have family members who have had BPH. Have certain health conditions such as: Obesity . Heart disease and problems with blood circulation . Type 2 diabetes . Erectile dysfunction . Don't get enough physical activity . What are the symptoms of BPH? Symptoms of BPH include: Having a frequent or urgent need to urinate Waking up many times to urinate Having problems with urine flow, such as: Trouble starting to urinate A stream that's weak, slow, or stops and starts Dribbling after urination Urinary incontinence Feeling that you can't completely empty your bladder Pain after ejaculation or during urination Urine with an unusual color or smell It's important to see your health care provider if you have any of these symptoms because they could be from a more serious health problem. You should get medical help right away if you: Can't urinate at all Have fever and chills with urination that's painful, frequent, and urgent Have blood in your urine Have pain in your lower abdomen (belly) and urinary tract What other problems can BPH cause? For most people, BPH doesn't cause other problems. But BPH increases your chance of developing serious conditions, including: Acute urinary retention. With this condition, you suddenly can't urinate at all. This a medical emergency .  Acute urinary retention is common in older males and the chance of having it increases with age. It may be triggered by: Taking certain over-the-counter cold or allergy medicines Drinking alcohol Cold temperatures Not moving enough over a long period of time Urinary tract infections (UTIs) Bladder damage and bladder stones Kidney damage How is BPH diagnosed? To find out if you have BPH, your provider will: Ask about your medical history. Be sure to tell your provider about all the medicines you take, because certain medicines can make BPH symptoms worse. Ask about your family health history. Examine you. The exam may include a digital rectal exam (DRE) of your prostate. In a DRE, your provider inserts a gloved finger into your rectum to check if your prostate is large, tender, or irregular in any other way. Order medical tests, if needed , such as: Urine tests. A PSA blood test (prostate-specific antigen test). Urodynamic testing to see how well you can hold and release urine. Cystoscopy to look inside your urethra and bladder . Ultrasound pictures of your prostate and urinary tract. A prostate biopsy to diagnose or rule out prostate cancer. What are the treatments for BPH? Not everyone needs treatment for BPH. Treatment options depend on how much your symptoms bother you, your health, age, and the size of your prostate: Lifestyle changes may improve mild symptoms. They include: Drinking less before bedtime or going out Avoiding or cutting back on beverages with caffeine and alcohol Bladder training and exercising the muscles that control urine flow Preventing or treating constipation Medicines can help mild to moderate symptoms by: Stopping the prostate from growing Shrinking the prostate Relaxing muscles to improve urine flow Sometimes combining 2 types of medicine helps more than taking just one type of medicine. Medical procedures can help improve moderate to severe BPH symptoms when medicines don't help enough. There are several different types of procedures. They all use an instrument inserted into the urethra to either: Widen the urethra Destroy part of the prostate with heat Surgery may be helpful when symptoms are severe, other treatments haven't helped, or you have another problem, such as bladder damage. Different types of surgery are used to: Remove part or all of the prostate Make cuts in the prostate to take pressure off the urethra Most BPH surgery is done with tools inserted into the urethra. Your provider can explain the possible benefits and side effects of your treatment options so you can decide what's best for you. Can BPH be prevented? Researchers haven't found ways to prevent BPH. You can take care of your prostate health by: Talking with your provider about your risk for developing an enlarged prostate Getting regular checkups Paying attention to your symptoms so you can get treatment early if you see signs of BPH NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common type of male sexual dysfunction. It is when a man has trouble getting or keeping an erection. ED becomes more common as you get older.  But it's not a natural part of aging. Some people have trouble speaking with their doctors about sex. But if you have ED, you should tell your doctor. ED can be a sign of health problems. It may mean your blood vessels are clogged. It may mean you have nerve damage from diabetes. If you don't see your doctor, these problems will go untreated. Your doctor can offer several new treatments for ED. For many men, the answer is as simple as taking a pill. Getting more exercise, losing weight, or stopping smoking may also help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). It can cause sores on your genital or rectal area, buttocks, and thighs.  You can get it from having vaginal, anal, or oral sex with someone who has it. The virus can spread even when sores are not present. Mothers can also infect their babies during childbirth. Symptoms of herpes are called outbreaks.  You usually get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. The sores are blisters which break and become painful, and then heal. Sometimes people do not know they have herpes because they have no symptoms or very mild symptoms. The virus can be more serious in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems. Repeat outbreaks are common, especially during the first year. Over time, you get them less often and the symptoms become milder.  The virus stays in your body for life. There are tests that can diagnose genital herpes. There is no cure.  However, medicines can help lessen symptoms, decrease outbreaks, and lower the risk of passing the virus to others. Correct usage of latex condoms can reduce, but not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading herpes. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex.

Genital warts are a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV). The warts usually appear as a small bump or group of bumps in the genital area. They are flesh-colored and can be flat or look bumpy like cauliflower. Some genital warts are so small you cannot see them. In women, the warts usually occur in or around the vagina, on the cervix, or around the anus. In men, genital warts are less common. They may have warts on the tip of the penis, around the anus, or on the scrotum, thigh, or groin. You can get genital warts during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with an infected partner.  Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. HPV vaccines may help prevent some of the HPV infections that cause genital warts. Your health care provider usually diagnoses genital warts by seeing them. The warts might disappear on their own. If not, your health care provider can treat or remove them. HPV stays in your body even after treatment, so warts can come back. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection (STI).  It is most common in young adults. The bacteria that cause gonorrhea can infect the genital tract, mouth, or anus. You can get gonorrhea during vaginal, oral, or anal sex with an infected partner.   A pregnant woman can pass it to her baby during childbirth. Gonorrhea does not always cause symptoms. In men, gonorrhea can cause pain when urinating and discharge from the penis. If untreated, it can cause problems with the prostate and testicles. In women, the early symptoms of gonorrhea often are mild. Later, it can cause bleeding between periods, pain when urinating, and increased discharge from the vagina. If untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease , which causes problems with pregnancy and infertility. Your health care provider will diagnose gonorrhea with lab tests. Treatment is with antibiotics. Treating gonorrhea is becoming more difficult because drug-resistant strains are increasing. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading gonorrhea. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Infertility means not being able to become pregnant after a year of trying. If a woman can get pregnant but keeps having miscarriages or stillbirths , that's also called infertility. Infertility is fairly common. After one year of having unprotected sex, about 15% of couples are unable to get pregnant. About a third of the time, infertility can be traced to the woman . In another third of cases, it is because of the man . The rest of the time, it is because of both partners or no cause can be found. There are treatments that are specifically for men or for women. Some involve both partners. Drugs, assisted reproductive technology , and surgery are common treatments. Happily, many couples treated for infertility go on to have babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Problems with the penis can cause pain and affect a man's sexual function and fertility. 
Penis disorders include: Erectile dysfunction - inability to get or keep an 
erection Priapism - a painful erection that does not go away Peyronie's disease - bending of the penis during an erection due to a hard lump 
called a plaque Balanitis - inflammation of the skin covering the head of the penis, most often in 
men and boys who have not been circumcised Penile cancer - a rare form of cancer, highly curable when caught early

What is prostate cancer? Cancer is a disease in which cells in the body grow out of control. Prostate cancer begins in the cells of the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer. It often grows very slowly. If it does not spread to other parts of the body, it may not cause serious problems. But sometimes prostate cancer can grow quickly and spread to other parts of the body. This kind of prostate cancer is serious. What causes prostate cancer? Researchers don't know for sure what causes prostate cancer. They do know that it happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA). Sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. There are also certain genetic changes that happen during your lifetime that can raise your risk of prostate cancer. But often the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Who is more likely to develop prostate cancer? Anyone who has a prostate can develop prostate cancer. But certain factors can make you more likely to develop it: Age. Your chance of developing prostate cancer increases as you get older. Prostate cancer is rare in people under age 50. Family health history. Your risk of prostate cancer is higher if you have a parent, sibling, or child who has or has had prostate cancer. Race. African Americans are more likely to get prostate cancer.  They're also more likely to: Get prostate cancer at a younger age. Have more serious prostate cancer. Die from prostate cancer. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? Prostate cancer doesn't always cause symptoms, especially at first. If it does cause symptoms, they may include: Problems urinating (peeing), such as: A urine stream that's weak, hard to start, or starts and stops Suddenly needing to urinate right away Urinating often, especially at night Pain or burning when urinating Blood in your urine or semen Pain in your lower back , hips, or pelvis that does not go away Painful ejaculation (the release of semen through the penis during orgasm) But many of these symptoms may be from other common prostate problems that aren't cancer, such as an enlarged prostate . You should discuss your prostate health with your health care provider if you: Have symptoms that could be prostate cancer Have a high risk for developing prostate cancer Had a screening test that suggests you could have prostate cancer What are prostate tests and how is prostate cancer diagnosed? Tests which check for prostate cancer include: A digital rectal exam (DRE). In this exam, your provider feels your prostate for lumps or anything unusual by inserting a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum. A prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test. A high PSA blood level may be a sign of prostate cancer. But many other things can cause high PSA levels, too. Imaging tests. These tests may use ultrasound or MRI to make pictures of your prostate. If these tests show that you might have prostate cancer, the next step is usually a prostate biopsy . A biopsy is the only way to diagnose prostate cancer. During a biopsy, a doctor uses a hollow needle to remove some prostate tissue. The tissue is studied under a microscope to look for cancer cells. What are the treatments for prostate cancer? Your treatment options usually depend on your age, your general health, and how serious the cancer is. Your treatment may include one or more of options: Observation ,which is mostly used if you are older, your prostate cancer isn't likely to grow quickly, and you don't have symptoms or you have other medical conditions. Your doctor will keep checking on your cancer over time so to see whether you will need to start treatment for the cancer. There are two types of observation: Watchful waiting means having little or no testing. If symptoms begin or change, you will get treatment to relieve them, but not to treat the cancer. Active surveillance means having regular tests to see if your prostate cancer has changed. If the tests show the cancer is starting to grow or if you develop symptoms, then you will have treatment to try to cure the cancer. Surgery to remove your prostate gland may be an option if your cancer hasn't spread outside of your prostate. Radiation therapy uses high energy to kill cancer cells or prevent them from growing. Hormone therapy blocks cancer cells from getting the hormones they need to grow. It may include taking medicines or having surgery to remove the testicles. Chemotherapy uses medicines to kill cancer cells, slow their growth, or stop them from spreading. You might take the drugs by mouth, as an injection (shot), as a cream, or intravenously (by IV). Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells. This treatment causes less harm to healthy cells than radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Immunotherapy helps your own immune system to fight cancer. Can prostate cancer be prevented? Making healthy lifestyle changes may help to prevent some prostate cancers. These changes include: Being at a healthy weight Quitting smoking Getting enough exercise Eating healthy foods NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is cancer screening? Cancer is a disease when the cells of the body grow out of control. Cancer screening is having tests to look for signs of cancer before you have any symptoms. By the time cancer causes symptoms, it may have already spread to other parts of your body. A screening test may help find cancer early, when it may be easier to treat. Cancer screening only tells you whether you might have cancer. It doesn't diagnose cancer. If a screening test shows signs of cancer, you'll need to have other tests to find out if you do have cancer and how serious it may be. What is prostate cancer screening? Prostate cancer screening looks for signs of cancer in the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. Prostate cancer is most common in people over age 50. It usually grows slowly and doesn't cause health problems. In fact, it's possible to live a long life with prostate cancer and never know you have it. But in certain cases, prostate cancer may spread to other parts of the body and can be very serious. The goal of prostate cancer screening is to find prostate cancers that may be more likely to spread so they can be treated early. What tests screen for prostate cancer? Two tests are commonly used to screen for prostate cancer: A prostate-specific antigen test , also called a PSA blood test. PSA is a protein made by your prostate. A high level of PSA in your blood may mean you have prostate cancer, but it's not proof of cancer.  That's because many other things may cause high PSA levels, including: Having an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH) Having other common prostate problems Taking certain medicines In general, the higher your PSA, the more likely it is that you have cancer. But a low PSA blood level isn't a guarantee that you don't have cancer. Digital Rectal Examination (DRE). The DRE is a prostate exam.  In this exam, your health care provider inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for lumps or anything unusual. A DRE can check only one side of the prostate. A PSA test or a DRE may be able to detect prostate cancer at an early stage. But it is not clear whether early detection and treatment lower the risk of dying from prostate cancer. You should talk with your provider about the benefits and harms of prostate cancer screening. What are the possible benefits and harms of prostate cancer screening? The possible benefits of prostate cancer screening include: Finding and treating prostate cancer early before it spreads Getting a better sense of your prostate cancer risk (based on your PSA test) Peace of mind if your screening shows you're unlikely to have prostate cancer now The option to choose further testing and closely monitor your prostate if your screening shows you may have cancer The possible harms of prostate cancer screening include: Getting a false positive result. This means that your PSA test shows you may have prostate cancer when you really don't. A false positive may lead to: Worry while you have more tests to look for signs of cancer. A prostate biopsy .  In a biopsy, a doctor removes tissue from your prostate so it can be studied under a microscope to look for cancer cells. This is the only way to diagnose cancer. The possible harms of a prostate biopsy include: Fever Pain Blood in semen Urinary tract infection Having prostate cancer treatment that you may not have needed. Prostate cancer screening may lead to a cancer diagnosis, but it's not always clear whether the cancer is likely to grow and spread. You could have unnecessary treatment for cancer that would never have caused any health problems. And the common prostate cancer treatments may have serious, permanent complications, such as: Urinary incontinence Erectile dysfunction Problems controlling your bowel movements (BMs) Should I be screened for prostate cancer? Since there are benefits and risks to prostate screening, you should talk with your provider to decide if screening is right for you. You and your provider should consider: Your age. The risk of prostate cancer increases after age 50. Your family health history. If members of your family have had prostate cancer, your risk may be higher. Your race. Prostate cancer is more common in African Americans.  They also have a higher risk of developing prostate cancer at a younger age and having more serious disease. Your general health. Are you well enough to have treatment for prostate cancer if it's found? What you prefer. How do you feel about the possible benefits and harms of screening, diagnosis, and treatment? NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is the prostate? The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. What are prostate diseases? There are many types of prostate diseases: Prostatitis is inflammation (swelling and pain) in the prostate gland. It's the most common type of prostate problem in people under than age 50. There are different types: Chronic prostatitis is also called chronic pelvic pain syndrome. It's the most common type of prostatitis. Acute bacterial prostatitis starts suddenly from a bacterial infection and is treated with antibiotics . It is not common. Chronic bacterial prostatitis happens when a bacterial infection keeps coming back. The symptoms usually start slowly. It may take longer to treat than acute bacterial prostatitis. Asymptomatic prostatitis has no symptoms and usually doesn't need treatment. You may learn you have it after having tests for other health problems. Enlarged prostate is also called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) . The prostate gland tends to grow larger with age. That's why enlarged prostate is very common in older people and rare in those who are under age 40. When the prostate grows larger, it may press on your urethra and cause problems with urination . Prostate cancer happens when cancer cells form in the prostate gland. Prostate cancer is a common type of cancer in those aged 50 and older. Most prostate cancers grow slowly and may never cause health problems. But certain prostate cancers are serious. Who is more likely to develop prostate diseases? Anyone with a prostate can develop prostate problems. But some people are at higher risk. You may be more likely to develop prostatitis if you have: A lower urinary tract infection , also called a UTI. An infection in your lower urinary tract (bladder and urethra) may lead to acute or chronic bacterial prostatitis. Nerve damage in your lower urinary tract from surgery or an injury. This may lead to chronic prostatitis. Emotional stress , which can lead to chronic prostatitis. You may be more likely to develop an enlarged prostate (BPH) if you: Are age 40 or older. Have family members who have had BPH. Have certain health conditions such as: Obesity . Heart disease and problems with blood circulation . Type 2 diabetes . Don't get enough physical activity . You may be more likely to develop prostate cancer if you: Are older than age 50. Have a parent, sibling, or child who has or had prostate cancer. Are African American. What are the symptoms of prostate diseases? The symptoms of prostate problems include: Needing to urinate a lot . Needing to rush to the bathroom, but not being able to urinate or only going a little. Leaking or dribbling urine . Having a weak urine stream. Other symptoms depend on the type of prostate problem you have and may include: Not being able to urinate at all. This is a medical emergency. Any problems, starting or controlling urine flow. Waking up often to urinate. Blood in your urine or urine that has an unusual smell or color. Fever , chills, or body aches. Great discomfort or pain: While urinating or after ejaculation. In your abdomen (belly), between your scrotum and anus, or in your scrotum or penis. Contact your provider if you have any of these symptoms. How are prostate diseases diagnosed? To find out if you have a prostate problem, your provider will: Ask about your medical history and symptoms. Ask about your family health history. Do a physical exam. The exam may include a digital rectal exam (DRE) of your prostate. In a DRE, your provider inserts a gloved finger into your rectum to feel the general size and condition of your prostate. Order tests, if needed. Tests may include: Blood and urine tests to look for infection. Urodynamic testing to see how well you can hold and release urine. Cystoscopy to look inside your urethra and bladder . Ultrasound pictures of your prostate and urinary tract. A PSA blood test (prostate-specific antigen test). Prostate biopsy to diagnose or rule out cancer. Treatment depends on what prostate disease you have and which symptoms bother you most. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy . If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start. Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides. Use good hygiene , including handwashing. If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures.

Sexuality is a big part of being human. Love, affection and sexual intimacy all play a role in healthy relationships. They also contribute to your sense of well-being. A number of disorders can affect the ability to have or enjoy sex  in both men and women . Factors that can affect sexual health include: Fear of unplanned pregnancy Concerns about infertility Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Chronic diseases such as cancer or heart disease Medicines that affect sexual desire or performance

What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are infections that are passed from one person to another through sexual contact. They are usually spread during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. But sometimes they can spread through other sexual contact involving the penis, vagina, mouth, or anus. This is because some STIs, like herpes and HPV, are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Some STIs can be passed from a pregnant person to the baby, either during pregnancy or when giving birth. Other ways that some STIs may be spread include during breastfeeding , through blood transfusions , or by sharing needles. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis What causes sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs can be caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites . Who is affected by sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Most STIs affect both men and women, but in many cases the health problems they cause can be more severe for 
women. If an STI is passed to a baby, it can cause serious health problems. What are the symptoms of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs don't always cause symptoms or may only cause mild symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection and not know it. And even without symptoms, STIs can still be harmful and may be passed on during sex. If there are symptoms, they could include: Unusual discharge from the penis or vagina Sores or warts on the genital area Painful or frequent urination (peeing) Itching and redness in the genital area Blisters or sores in or around the mouth Abnormal vaginal odor Anal itching, soreness, or bleeding Abdominal (belly) pain Fever How are sexually transmitted infections (STIs) diagnosed? If you are sexually active, you should talk to your health care provider about your risk for STIs and whether you need to be tested. This is especially important since many STIs do not usually cause symptoms. Some STIs may be diagnosed during a physical exam or through STI testing . Some tests involve a microscopic examination of a sore or fluid swabbed from the vagina, penis, or anus. Blood tests can diagnose other types of STIs. What are the treatments for sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Antibiotics can treat STIs that are caused by bacteria or parasites. There is no cure for STIs caused by viruses, but antiviral medicines can often help with the symptoms and lower your risk of spreading the infection. It's important to get treatment if you have an STI. Some types of STIs can cause serious health problems if they are not treated. Can sexually transmitted infections (STIs) be prevented? The surest way to protect yourself against STIs is to not have sex. If you do decide to have sex, you can lower your risk of getting an STI by: Having you and your partner tested for STIs before having sex. Using a condom every time you have sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading STIs. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Reducing your number of sex partners. You might even consider "mutual monogamy" with just one partner. This means that you agree to be sexually active only with them, and they agree to be sexually active only with you. But first you should both get tested to make sure that you don't already have an STI. Getting vaccinated against HPV and hepatitis B .

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by bacteria. It infects the genital area, lips, mouth, or anus of both men and women. You usually get syphilis from sexual contact with someone who has it. It can also pass from mother to baby during pregnancy. The early stage of syphilis usually causes a single, small, painless sore. Sometimes it causes swelling in nearby lymph nodes. If you do not treat it, syphilis usually causes a non-itchy skin rash, often on your hands and feet. Many people do not notice symptoms for years. Symptoms can go away and come back. The sores caused by syphilis make it easier to get or give someone HIV during sex. If you are pregnant, syphilis can cause complications, or you could lose your baby. In rare cases, syphilis causes serious health problems and even death. Syphilis is easy to cure with antibiotics if you catch it early. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading syphilis. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is a cancer that develops in the tissues of one or both testicles. The testicles, or testes, are part of the male reproductive system. They make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped glands inside the scrotum, a sac of loose skin that lies below the penis. You can get cancer in one or both testicles. Who is most likely to develop testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is very rare. You can get it at any age, but it is most common in men between the ages of 20 and 39.  It is also more common in those who: Have had abnormal testicle development Have had an undescended testicle, a condition in which one or both testicles fail to move into the scrotum before birth Have had testicle cancer before Have a family history of the cancer Are White What are the symptoms of testicular cancer? The symptoms of testicular cancer may include: A painless lump or swelling in either testicle A change in how the testicle feels A dull ache in the lower abdomen (belly) or the groin (the area where the thigh meets the abdomen) A sudden build-up of fluid in the scrotum Pain or discomfort in a testicle or in the scrotum How is testicular cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have testicular cancer, your health care provider may use: A physical exam. Blood tests. An ultrasound of the testicles. An inguinal orchiectomy, which is a procedure to remove the entire testicle. A tissue sample from the testicle is viewed under a microscope to check for cancer cells. What are the treatments for testicular cancer? Testicular cancer can usually be cured.The treatment options include: Surgery (if the testicle has not already been removed during diagnosis). Radiation therapy . Chemotherapy . High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant . Surveillance, which might be done after surgery. It means that your provider will closely follow your condition with regular exams and tests. You won't get any further treatment unless there are changes in your test results. Some of the treatments may also cause infertility . If you may want to have children later on, you should consider sperm banking before treatment. After you have finished your treatment, you will need regular follow-up testing to make sure that the cancer has not come back. If you have had cancer in one testicle, you have a higher risk of getting cancer in the other testicle. So it's important to check the other testicle regularly and let your provider know if you notice any changes or unusual symptoms. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Testicles, or testes, make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped organs inside the scrotum, the loose sac of skin behind the penis. It's easy to injure your testicles because they are not protected by bones or muscles. Men and boys should wear athletic supporters when they play sports. You should examine your testicles monthly and seek medical attention for lumps, redness, pain or other changes. Testicles can get inflamed or infected. They can also develop cancer. Testicular cancer is rare and highly treatable. It usually happens between the ages of 15 and 40.

A vasectomy is a type of minor surgery that prevents a man from being able to get a woman pregnant. It is a permanent form of birth control . A vasectomy works by cutting the vas deferens, which are the tubes that carry the sperm out of the testicles. Then the sperm can no longer reach the semen. Semen is the fluid that the penis ejaculates (releases during orgasm). Since there are no sperm, the man cannot get a woman pregnant. The surgery is quick; it usually takes less than 30 minutes. You will probably be able to go home the same day. You may have some discomfort, bruising, and swelling for a few days. In most cases, you will fully recover in less than a week. A vasectomy is one of the most effective forms of birth control. But it takes about three months (or about 20 ejaculations) before it is effective. You will still need to use other birth control until you know that your semen doesn't have any more sperm in it. After two to three months, your health care provider will test your semen to make sure that there are no sperm in it. Having a vasectomy does not affect your sex life. It does not decrease your sex drive. And it will not affect your ability to get an erection or have an orgasm. Vasectomies can sometimes be reversed, but not always. It is done with a procedure to reconnect the vas deferens. Another option if you decide to have children later might be to have sperm taken from your testicles. The sperm could then be used for in vitro fertilization (IVF). However, this may not always work. It's also important to know that both a vasectomy reversal and IVF are expensive. Having a vasectomy does not protect you from sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as HIV .   Using a condom every time you have anal, vaginal, or oral sex is the only way to protect against STIs. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? Acute lymphocytic leukemia is a type of acute leukemia. It's also called ALL and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. "Acute" means that it usually gets worse quickly if it's not treated. ALL is the most common type of cancer in children . It can also affect adults. In ALL, the bone marrow makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. These cells normally help your body fight infection. But in ALL, they are abnormal and cannot fight infection very well. They also crowd out the healthy cells, which can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding. These abnormal cells can also spread to other parts of the body, including the brain and spinal cord. What causes acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? ALL happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise your risk of ALL. Who is at risk for acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? The factors that raise your risk of ALL include: Being male Being white Being over age 70 Having had chemotherapy or radiation therapy Having been exposed to high levels of radiation Having certain genetic disorders , such as Down syndrome What are the symptoms of acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? The signs and symptoms of ALL include: Weakness or feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Shortness of breath Weight loss or loss of appetite Pain in the bones or stomach Pain or feeling of fullness below the ribs Swollen lymph nodes - you may notice them as painless lumps in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin Having had many infections How is acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose ALL and figure out which subtype you have: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as Complete blood count (CBC) with differential Blood chemistry tests such as a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and electrolyte panel Blood smear Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with ALL, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture , which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)? Treatments for ALL include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Treatment is usually done in two phases: The goal of the first phase is to kill the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow. This treatment puts the leukemia into remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The second phase is known as post-remission therapy. Its goal is to prevent a relapse (return) of the cancer. It involves killing any remaining leukemia cells that may not be active but could begin to regrow. Treatment during both phases also usually includes central nervous system (CNS) prophylaxis therapy. This therapy helps prevent the spread of leukemia cells to the brain and spinal cord. It may be high dose chemotherapy or chemotherapy injected into the spinal cord. It also sometimes includes radiation therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a type of acute leukemia. "Acute" means that the leukemia usually gets worse quickly if it's not treated. In AML, the bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. When the abnormal cells crowd out the healthy cells, it can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding. The abnormal cells can also spread outside the blood to other parts of the body. There are several different subtypes of AML. The subtypes are based on how developed the cancer cells are when you get your diagnosis and how different they are from normal cells. What causes acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? AML happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise your risk of AML. Who is at risk for acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? The factors that raise your risk of AML include: Being male Smoking, especially after age 60 Having had chemotherapy or radiation therapy Treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) as a child Exposure to the chemical benzene A history of another blood disorder such as myelodysplastic syndrome What are the symptoms of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? The signs and symptoms of AML include: Fever Shortness of breath Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Weakness or feeling tired Weight loss or loss of appetite Bone or joint pain, if the abnormal cells build up near or inside the bones How is acute myeloid leukemia (AML) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose AML and figure out which subtype you have: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with AML, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture , which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for acute myeloid leukemia (AML)? Treatments for AML include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Other anticancer medicines Which treatment you get often depends on which subtype of AML you have.
Treatment is usually done in two phases: The goal of the first phase is to kill the leukemia cells in the blood and bone marrow. This puts the leukemia into remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The second phase is known as post-remission therapy. Its goal is to prevent a relapse (return) of the cancer. It involves killing any remaining leukemia cells that may not be active but could begin to regrow. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your adrenal, or suprarenal, glands are located on the top of each kidney. These glands produce hormones that you can't live without, including sex hormones and cortisol, which helps you respond to stress and has many other functions. A number of disorders can affect the adrenal glands , including tumors.   Tumors can be either benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer. Malignant ones are. Most adrenal gland tumors are benign.  They usually do not cause symptoms and may not require treatment. Malignant adrenal gland cancers are uncommon. Types of tumors include: Adrenocortical carcinoma - cancer in the outer part of the gland Neuroblastoma , a type of childhood cancer Pheochromocytoma - a rare tumor that is usually benign Symptoms depend on the type of cancer you have. Treatments may include surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy.

What is anal cancer? Your anus is the opening at the end of your large intestine. It is where stool (poop) leaves your body. The anus is formed partly from your outer layers of skin and partly from your intestine. Anal cancer is a type of cancer that forms in the tissues of your anus. Who is more likely to develop anal cancer? Anyone can get anal cancer, but you are more likely to develop it if you: You have an infection with high-risk HPV , especially if you have certain types. Most anal cancers are related to HPV infection. Have a weakened immune system , from conditions such as HIV or because of medicines you need to take after an organ transplant . Have had vulvar , vaginal , or cervical cancer. Have many sexual partners. Have anal sex. Smoke cigarettes . What are the symptoms of anal cancer? The signs and symptoms of anal cancer may include: Bleeding from the anus or rectum A lump near the anus Pain or pressure in the area around the anus Itching or discharge from the anus A change in bowel habits , such as narrower stools, having to go more often, or bowel incontinence How is anal cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have anal cancer, your provider: Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. Will ask about your family health history. May do a digital rectal examination (DRE). A DRE is an exam of the anus and rectum. For the exam, your provider will insert a lubricated, gloved finger into the lower part of your rectum to feel for lumps or anything else that seems unusual. May order tests that examine the anus and rectum, such as: An anoscopy , an exam of the anus and lower rectum using a short, lighted tube called an anoscope. There is also a type of anoscopy called a high-resolution anoscopy. It uses a special magnifying device called a colposcope along with the anoscope to view these areas. A proctoscopy, a procedure to look inside the rectum and anus using a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens. An endo-anal or endorectal ultrasound , a procedure in which an ultrasound probe is inserted into the rectum. May do a biopsy during an anoscopy or proctoscopy. What are the treatments for anal cancer? The treatments for anal cancer include radiation therapy , chemotherapy , and surgery. Which treatment you get will depend on how advanced the cancer is, your overall health, and your preferences. Can anal cancer be prevented? You may be able to lower your risk of getting anal cancer by getting an HPV vaccine and not smoking. Contact your provider if you need help quitting smoking . It is currently not known if using condoms can prevent anal HPV infections. But using latex condoms every time you have sex can help prevent HIV, a risk factor for anal cancer. And they also help prevent other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. If you are an adult with HIV, it's important to get an anal cancer screening every year. The screening checks for anything that seems unusual, such as lumps, burning, and precancer cells (cells that could turn into cancer). The screening will include a digital rectal exam. If anything unusual is found, you will have an anoscopy or high resolution anoscopy.

Tumors are abnormal growths in your body. They can be either benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer. Malignant ones are. Benign tumors grow only in one place. They cannot spread or invade other parts of your body. Even so, they can be dangerous if they press on vital organs, such as your brain. Tumors are made up of extra cells. Normally, cells grow and divide to form new cells as your body needs them. When cells grow old, they die, and new cells take their place. Sometimes, this process goes wrong. New cells form when your body does not need them, and old cells do not die when they should. These extra cells can divide without stopping and may form tumor. Treatment often involves surgery. Benign tumors usually don't grow back. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your liver makes a digestive juice called bile. Your gallbladder stores it between meals. When you eat, your gallbladder pushes the bile into tubes called bile ducts . They carry the bile to your small intestine. The bile helps break down fat. It also helps the liver get rid of toxins and wastes. Bile duct cancer is rare. It can happen in the parts of the bile ducts that are outside or inside the liver. Cancer of the bile duct outside of the liver is much more common. Risk factors include having inflammation of the bile duct, ulcerative colitis , and some liver diseases. Symptoms can include: Jaundice Itchy skin Fever Abdominal pain Tests to diagnose bile duct cancer may include a physical exam, imaging tests of the liver and bile ducts, blood tests, and a biopsy. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A biopsy is a procedure that removes cells or tissue from your body.  A doctor called a pathologist looks at the cells or tissue under a microscope to check for damage or disease. The pathologist may also do other tests on it. Biopsies can be done on all parts of the body. In most cases, a biopsy is the only test that can tell for sure if a suspicious area is cancer.  But biopsies are performed for many other reasons too. There are different types of biopsies. A needle biopsy removes tissue with a needle passed through your skin to the site of the problem. Other kinds of biopsies may require surgery.

The bladder is a hollow organ in your lower abdomen that stores urine. Bladder cancer occurs in the lining of the bladder. It is the sixth most common type of cancer in the United States. Symptoms include: Blood in your urine A frequent urge to urinate Pain when you urinate Low back pain Risk factors for developing bladder cancer include smoking and exposure to certain chemicals in the workplace.  People with a family history of bladder cancer or who are older, white, or male have a higher risk. Treatments for bladder cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and biologic therapy. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Cancer that starts in a bone is uncommon.  Cancer that has spread to the bone from another part of the body is more common. There are three types of bone cancer: Osteosarcoma - occurs most often between ages 10 and 19. It is more common in the knee and upper arm. Chondrosarcoma - starts in cartilage, usually after age 40 Ewing's sarcoma - occurs most often in children and teens under 19. It is more common in boys than girls. The most common symptom of bone cancer is pain. Other symptoms vary, depending on the location and size of the cancer. Surgery is often the main treatment for bone cancer. Other treatments may include amputation, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. Because bone cancer can come back after treatment, regular follow-up visits are important. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A brain tumor is a growth of abnormal cells in the tissues of the brain. Brain tumors can be benign, with no cancer cells, or malignant, with cancer cells that grow quickly.  Some are primary brain tumors, which start in the brain. Others are metastatic, and they start somewhere else in the body and move to the brain. Brain tumors can cause many symptoms. Some of the most common are: Headaches, often in the morning Nausea and vomiting Changes in your ability to talk, hear, or see Problems with balance or walking Problems with thinking or memory Feeling weak or sleepy Changes in your mood or behavior Seizures Doctors diagnose brain tumors by doing a neurologic exam and tests including an MRI, CT scan, and biopsy. Treatment options include watchful waiting, surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Many people get a combination of treatments. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is breast cancer? Breast cancer is a cancer that starts in breast tissue.  It happens when cells in the breast change and grow out of control. The cells usually form a tumor. Sometimes the cancer does not spread any further. This is called "in situ." If the cancer spreads outside the breast, the cancer is called "invasive." It may just spread to nearby tissues and lymph nodes. Or the cancer may metastasize (spread to other parts of the body) through the lymph system or the blood. Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in women in the United States. Rarely, it can also affect men . What are the types of breast cancer? There are different types of breast cancer. The types are based on which breast cells turn into cancer. The types include: Ductal carcinoma , which begins in the cells of the ducts. This is the most common type. Lobular carcinoma , which begins in the lobules. It is more often found in both breasts than other types of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer , in which cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. The breast becomes warm, red, and swollen. This is a rare type. Paget's disease of the breast , which is a cancer involving the skin of the nipple. It usually also affects the darker skin around the nipple. It is also rare. What causes breast cancer? Breast cancer happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA). Often, the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. But sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Breast cancer that is caused by inherited genetic changes is called hereditary breast cancer. There are also certain genetic changes that can raise your risk of breast cancer, including changes in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. These two changes also raise your risk of ovarian and other cancers. Besides genetics, your lifestyle and the environment can affect your risk of breast cancer. Who is at risk for breast cancer? The factors that raise your risk of breast cancer include: Older age History of breast cancer or benign (noncancer) breast disease Inherited risk of breast cancer, including having BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene changes Dense breast tissue A reproductive history that leads to more exposure to the estrogen hormone, including Menstruating at an early age Being at an older age when you first gave birth or never having given birth Starting menopause at a later age Taking hormone therapy for symptoms of menopause Radiation therapy to the breast or chest Obesity Drinking alcohol What are the signs and symptoms of breast cancer? The signs and symptoms of breast cancer include: A new lump or thickening in or near the breast or in the armpit. A change in the size or shape of the breast. A dimple or puckering in the skin of the breast. It may look like the skin of an orange. A nipple turned inward into the breast. Nipple discharge other than breast milk. The discharge might happen suddenly, be bloody, or happen in only one breast. Scaly, red, or swollen skin in the nipple area or the breast Pain in any area of the breast. How is breast cancer diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose breast cancer and figure out which type you have: A physical exam, including a clinical breast exam (CBE). This involves checking for any lumps or anything else that seems unusual with the breasts and armpits. A medical history. Imaging tests, such as a mammogram , an ultrasound , or an MRI . Breast biopsy . Blood chemistry tests, which measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Some of the specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , and an electrolyte panel . If these tests show that you have breast cancer, you will have tests that study the cancer cells. These tests help your provider decide which treatment would be best for you. The tests may include: Genetic tests for genetic changes such as in the BRCA and TP53 genes. HER2 test . HER2 is a protein involved with cell growth. It is on the outside of all breast cells. If your breast cancer cells have more HER2 than normal, they can grow more quickly and spread to other parts of the body. An estrogen and progesterone receptor test. This test measures the amount of estrogen and progesterone ( hormones ) receptors in cancer tissue. If there are more receptors than normal, the cancer is called estrogen and/or progesterone receptor positive. This type of breast cancer may grow more quickly. Another step is staging the cancer. Staging involves doing tests to find out whether the cancer has spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. The tests may include other diagnostic imaging tests and a sentinel lymph node biopsy. This biopsy is done to see whether the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. What are the treatments for breast cancer? Treatments for breast cancer include: Surgery such as A mastectomy , which removes the whole breast A lumpectomy to remove the cancer and some normal tissue around it, but not the breast itself Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Hormone therapy, which blocks cancer cells from getting the hormones they need to grow Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Immunotherapy Can breast cancer be prevented? You may be able to help prevent breast cancer by making healthy lifestyle changes such as: Staying at a healthy weight Limiting alcohol use Getting enough exercise e Limiting your exposure to estrogen by Breastfeeding your babies if you can Limiting hormone therapy If you are at high risk, your health care provider may suggest that you take certain medicines to lower the risk. Some women at very high risk may decide to get a mastectomy (of their healthy breasts) to prevent breast cancer. It's also important to get regular mammograms. They may be able to identify breast cancer in the early stages, when it is easier to treat. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Cancer begins in your cells, which are the building blocks of your body.   Normally, your body forms new cells as you need them, replacing old cells that die. Sometimes this process goes wrong. New cells grow even when you don't need them, and old cells don't die when they should. These extra cells can form a mass called a tumor. Tumors can be benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer while malignant ones are. Cells from malignant tumors can invade nearby tissues. They can also break away and spread to other parts of the body. Cancer is not just one disease but many diseases. There are more than 100 different types of cancer. Most cancers are named for where they start. For example, lung cancer starts in the lung, and breast cancer starts in the breast. The spread of cancer from one part of the body to another is called metastasis. Symptoms and treatment depend on the cancer type and how advanced it is. Most treatment plans may include surgery, radiation and/or chemotherapy . Some may involve hormone therapy, immunotherapy or other types of biologic therapy, or stem cell transplantation . NIH: National Cancer Institute

You have many choices to make about your cancer treatment. One choice you might be thinking about is complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). CAM is the term for medical products and practices that are not part of standard care.  Examples of CAM therapies are acupuncture, chiropractic, and herbal medicines. People with cancer may use CAM to: Help cope with the side effects of cancer treatments Ease worries of cancer treatment and related stress Feel that they are doing something more to help their own care CAM treatments do not work for everyone. Some methods, such as acupuncture, might help with nausea, pain and other side effects of cancer treatment.  Talk to your doctor to make sure that all aspects of your cancer care work together. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is cancer chemotherapy? Cancer chemotherapy is a type of cancer treatment. It uses medicines to destroy cancer cells. Normally, the cells in your body grow and die in a controlled way. Cancer cells keep growing without control. Chemotherapy works by killing the cancer cells, stopping them from spreading, or slowing their growth. Chemotherapy is used to: Treat cancer by curing the cancer, lessening the chance it will return, or stopping or slowing its growth. Ease cancer symptoms by shrinking tumors that are causing pain and other problems. What are the side effects of chemotherapy? Chemotherapy does not just destroy cancer cells. It can also harm some healthy cells, which causes side effects. You may have a lot of side effects, some side effects, or none at all. It depends on the type and amount of chemotherapy you get and how your body reacts. Some common side effects are: Mouth sores Fatigue Nausea and vomiting Pain Hair loss There are ways to prevent or control some side effects. Talk with your health care provider about how to manage them. Healthy cells usually recover after chemotherapy is over, so most side effects gradually go away. What can I expect when getting chemotherapy? You may get chemotherapy in a hospital or at home, a doctor's office, or a medical clinic. You might be given the medicines by mouth, in a shot, as a cream, through a catheter, or intravenously (by IV). Your treatment plan will depend on the type of cancer you have, which chemotherapy medicines are used, the treatment goals, and how your body responds to the medicines. Chemotherapy may be given alone or with other treatments. You may get treatment every day, every week, or every month. You may have breaks between treatments so that your body has a chance to build new healthy cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Immunotherapy is a cancer treatment that helps your immune system fight cancer. It is a type of biological therapy. Biological therapy uses substances that are made from living organisms, or versions of these substances that are made in a lab. Doctors don't yet use immunotherapy as often as other cancer treatments, such as surgery, chemotherapy , and radiation therapy . But they do use immunotherapy for some types of cancer, and researchers are doing clinical trials to see whether it also works for other types. When you have cancer, some of your cells begin to multiply without stopping. They spread into the surrounding tissues. One reason that the cancer cells can keep growing and spreading is that they are able to hide from your immune system. Some immunotherapies can "mark" your cancer cells. This makes it easier for your immune system to find and destroy the cells. It is a type of targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Other types of immunotherapies work by boosting your immune system to work better against cancer. You could get immunotherapy intravenously (by IV), in pills or capsules, or in a cream for your skin. For bladder cancer, they might place it directly into your bladder. You may have treatment every day, week, or month. Some immunotherapies are given in cycles. It depends on your type of cancer, how advanced it is, the type of immunotherapy you get, and how well it is working. You may have side effects. The most common side effects are skin reactions at the needle site, if you get it by IV. Other side effects may include flu-like symptoms, or rarely, severe reactions. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Cancer is a group of related diseases. In all types of cancer, some of the body's cells begin to divide without stopping and spread into surrounding tissues. Normally, new cells form as you need them, replacing old cells that die. Sometimes, this process goes wrong. New cells form when you don't need them, and old cells don't die when they should. The extra cells can form a tumor. Tumors can be benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer. Malignant tumors are cancer, and the cancer cells can spread to nearby tissues. They can also break away and spread to other parts of the body. Children can get cancer in the same parts of the body as adults, but there are differences. Childhood cancers may happen suddenly, without early symptoms. Some types can often be cured. The most common children's cancer is leukemia . Some of the other more common types of cancer in children include brain tumors , lymphoma , and soft tissue sarcoma . Symptoms and treatment depend on the type of cancer and how advanced it is. Treatments may include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Stem cell transplants Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells NIH: National Cancer Institute

Learning to live with cancer Cancer is a common disease. Almost 40 percent of Americans will be diagnosed with cancer during their lifetimes. Even though cancer may be life-threatening, many people have successful treatment. Others live with cancer for a very long time. For most people with cancer, learning to live with the disease is one of the biggest challenges they've ever faced. That's because having cancer touches just about every part of your life and the lives of those around you. Cancer and its treatment may change: Your daily routines and ability to work Your important relationships The way you look, feel, and think about yourself You may feel more in control and prepared to cope with these changes if you learn about what to expect. Your health care provider can help you find information and support services that are right for you. Coping with feelings about having cancer Having cancer may cause a range of strong emotions, such as sadness, anger, fear, worry, or guilt. These feelings are normal, and they're likely to change over time. It's helpful to sort out your feelings in a way that's comfortable for you. You might try: Talking openly with someone you trust Writing about your feelings Using relaxation methods, such as meditation and other complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) Doing things you enjoy to give yourself a break from focusing on cancer If your emotions seem to take over your life, tell your provider. You may need extra support if you have symptoms of depression , stress , anxiety , or panic disorder . Communicating with your health care team During cancer treatment, you usually have a team of providers. Along with doctors and nurses, you may be able to talk with social workers, pharmacists, dietitians, and other health professionals. These professionals are prepared to help you deal with the issues that cancer brings up, including concerns about finances . But it's up to you to let your team know what's on your mind. Good communication with your providers may help you feel more in control and satisfied with your care. Your communications may be better if you: Tell your providers how much you want to know about your cancer and its treatment. Do you want all the details or just the big picture? Write down your questions and concerns before your visits. Bring a family member or a friend to your visits. This person can help by listening, taking notes, and asking questions. Talking openly with family and friends Cancer changes the daily routines and roles of the people who love and support you. They may need to start doing the things you've always done for them. And you may need their help doing things you've always done for yourself. These changes can be difficult for everyone. It may help to have an honest talk about changing roles and needs. If that sounds too difficult, ask a social worker or other member of your care team to help you talk with family and friends who are helping with your care. These caregivers may need some support , too. Dealing with changes in your self-image Cancer and its treatment may cause some big changes in how you look, feel, and think about yourself. For example, you may have: Less energy Temporary or permanent changes in your body, such as scars , or hair loss from chemotherapy Problems being sexually close or doubts about dating Coping with these changes can be hard. But most people find ways to feel more positive over time. If you feel well enough, you might try: Exercise . Walking, yoga, or other movement may help you feel stronger and more in control of your body. But check with your provider first. Staying involved in life and helping others. Think about volunteering, hobbies, or other activities that might make you feel good about yourself. Counseling for sexual problems. Talking with a professional, either with a partner or on your own, may help. Adjusting to life after treatment After treatment, you'll have regular cancer follow-up care. Your provider will explain the schedule of checkups and tests you'll need. This is a good time to discuss the challenges you may face ahead. Knowing what to expect may help you make plans as you find a "new normal" with cancer as part of your life. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Carcinoid tumors are rare, slow-growing cancers. They usually start in the lining of the digestive tract or in the lungs. They grow slowly and don't produce symptoms in the early stages. As a result, the average age of people diagnosed with digestive or lung carcinoids is about 60. In later stages the tumors sometimes produce hormones that can cause carcinoid syndrome. The syndrome causes flushing of the face and upper chest, diarrhea, and trouble breathing. Surgery is the main treatment for carcinoid tumors. If they haven't spread to other parts of the body, surgery can cure the cancer.

The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, the place where a baby grows during pregnancy. Cervical cancer is caused by a virus called HPV . The virus spreads through sexual contact. Most women's bodies are able to fight HPV infection. But sometimes the virus leads to cancer. You're at higher risk if you smoke, have had many children, use birth control pills for a long time, or have HIV infection. Cervical cancer may not cause any symptoms at first. Later, you may have pelvic pain or bleeding from the vagina. It usually takes several years for normal cells in the cervix to turn into cancer cells. Your health care provider can find abnormal cells by doing a Pap test to examine cells from the cervix. You may also have an HPV test.  If your results are abnormal, you may need a biopsy or other tests. By getting regular screenings , you can find and treat any problems before they turn into cancer. Treatment may include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination. The choice of treatment depends on the size of the tumor, whether the cancer has spread and whether you would like to become pregnant someday. Vaccines can protect against several types of HPV, including some that can cause cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, the place where a baby grows during pregnancy.  Cancer screening is looking for cancer before you have any symptoms. Cancer found early may be easier to treat. Cervical cancer screening is usually part of a woman's health checkup .  There are two types of tests: the Pap test and the HPV test.   For both, the doctor or nurse collects cells from the surface of the cervix.  With the Pap test, the lab checks the sample for cancer cells or abnormal cells that could become cancer later.  With the HPV test, the lab checks for HPV infection.  HPV is a virus that spreads through sexual contact.  It can sometimes lead to cancer.  If your screening tests are abnormal, your doctor may do more tests, such as a biopsy . Cervical cancer screening has risks.  The results can sometimes be wrong, and you may have unnecessary follow-up tests.  There are also benefits.  Screening has been shown to decrease the number of deaths from cervical cancer. You and your doctor should discuss your risk for cervical cancer, the pros and cons of the screening tests, at what age to start being screened, and how often to be screened.

Brain tumors are abnormal growths inside the skull. They are among the most common types of childhood cancers . Some are benign tumors, which aren't cancer. They can still be serious. Malignant tumors are cancerous. Childhood brain and spinal cord tumors can cause headaches and other symptoms. However, other conditions can also cause the same symptoms. Check with a doctor if your child has any of the following problems: Morning headache or headache that goes away after vomiting Frequent nausea and vomiting Vision, hearing, and speech problems Loss of balance or trouble walking Unusual sleepiness Personality changes Seizures Increased head size in infants The symptoms are not the same in every child. Doctors use physical and neurological exams, lab tests, and imaging to diagnose brain tumors. Most childhood brain tumors are diagnosed and removed in surgery. Treatment for children is sometimes different than for an adult. Long-term side effects are an important issue. The options also depend on the type of tumor and where it is. Removal of the tumor is often possible. If not, radiation, chemotherapy, or both may be used. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What are the types of leukemia in children? There are different types of leukemia. Some types are acute (fast growing). They usually get worse quickly if they are not treated. Most childhood leukemias are acute: Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) , which is the most common type of leukemia in children and the most common cancer in children . In ALL, the bone marrow makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) , which happens when bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. Other types of leukemia are chronic (slow growing). They usually get worse over a longer period of time. They are rare in children: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is more common in teens than children. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal granulocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is very rare in children. There are some other rare types of leukemia in children, including juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). What causes leukemia in children? Leukemia happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia. Who is at risk for leukemia in children? The factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia include: Having a brother or sister, especially a twin, with leukemia Past treatment with chemotherapy Exposure to radiation , including radiation therapy Having certain genetic conditions , such as Ataxia telangiectasia Down syndrome Fanconi anemia Li-Fraumeni syndrome Neurofibromatosis type 1 There are other factors that may raise the risk of getting one or more of the specific types of childhood leukemia. What are the symptoms of leukemia in children? Some of the symptoms of leukemia may include: Feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Weight loss or loss of appetite Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Other leukemia symptoms can be different from type to type. Chronic leukemia may not cause symptoms at first. How is leukemia in children diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose leukemia: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) Bone marrow tests. There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes Once there is a diagnosis of leukemia, other tests may be done to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture, which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for leukemia in children? The treatments for leukemia depend on which type it is, how severe the leukemia is, the child's age, and other factors. Possible treatments might include: chemotherapy radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Treatment for childhood leukemia is often successful. But the treatments can cause complications right away or later in life. Children who survived leukemia will need follow-up care the rest of their lives to watch for and treat any complications they may have. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a type of chronic leukemia. "Chronic" means that the leukemia usually gets worse slowly. In CLL, the bone marrow makes abnormal lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). When the abnormal cells crowd out the healthy cells, it can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding . The abnormal cells can also spread outside the blood to other parts of the body.
CLL is one of the most common types of leukemia in adults. It often occurs during or after middle age. It is rare in children . What causes chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? CLL happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown, so it's hard to predict who might get CLL. There are a few factors that might raise your risk. Who is at risk for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? It is hard to predict who will get CLL. There are a few factors that could raise your risk: Age - your risk goes up as you get older. Most people who are diagnosed with CLL are over 50. Family history of CLL and other blood and bone marrow diseases Racial/ethnic group - CLL is more common in whites than in people from other racial or ethnic groups Exposure to certain chemicals, including Agent Orange, a chemical that was used in the Vietnam War What are the symptoms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? In the beginning, CLL does not cause any symptoms. Later, you can have symptoms such as: Swollen lymph nodes - you may notice them as painless lumps in the neck, underarm, stomach, or groin Weakness or feeling tired Pain or a feeling of fullness below the ribs Fever and infection Easy bruising or bleeding Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Weight loss for no known reason Drenching night sweats How is chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose CLL: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) with differential and blood chemistry tests. Blood chemistry tests measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and an electrolyte panel . Flow cytometry tests, which check for leukemia cells and identify which type of leukemia it is. The tests can be done on blood, bone marrow, or other tissue. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes If you are diagnosed with CLL, you may have additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and bone marrow tests . What are the treatments for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)? Treatments for CLL include: Watchful waiting, which means that you don't get treatment right away. Your health care provider regularly checks to see if your signs or symptoms appear or change. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Immunotherapy Chemotherapy with bone marrow or stem cell transplant The goals of treatment are to slow the growth of the leukemia cells and to give you long periods of remission. Remission means that the signs and symptoms of cancer are reduced or have disappeared. The CLL may come back after remission, and you may need more treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What is chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a type of chronic leukemia. "Chronic" means that the leukemia usually gets worse slowly. In CML, the bone marrow makes abnormal granulocytes (a type of white blood cell). These abnormal cells are also called blasts. When the abnormal cells crowd out the healthy cells, it can lead to infection, anemia , and easy bleeding . The abnormal cells can also spread outside the blood to other parts of the body. CML usually occurs in adults during or after middle age. It is rare in children . What causes chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? Most people with CML have a genetic change called the Philadelphia chromosome. It's called that because researchers in Philadelphia discovered it. People normally have 23 pairs of chromosomes in each cell. These chromosomes contain your DNA (genetic material). In CML, part of the DNA from one chromosome moves to another chromosome. It combines with some DNA there, which creates a new gene called BCR-ABL. This gene causes your bone marrow to make an abnormal protein. This protein allows the leukemia cells to grow out of control. The Philadelphia chromosome isn't passed from parent to child. It happens during your lifetime. The cause is unknown. Who is at risk for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? It is hard to predict who will get CML. There are a few factors that could raise your risk: Age - your risk goes up as you get older Gender - CML is slightly more common in men Exposure to high-dose radiation What are the symptoms of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? Sometimes CML does not cause symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they can include: Feeling very tired Weight loss for no known reason Drenching night sweats Fever Pain or a feeling of fullness below the ribs on the left side How is chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose CML: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) with differential and blood chemistry tests. Blood chemistry tests measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , kidney function tests , liver function tests , and an electrolyte panel . Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes, including tests to look for the Philadelphia chromosome If you are diagnosed with CML, you may have additional tests such as imaging tests to see whether the cancer has spread. What are the phases of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? CML has three phases. The phases are based on how much the CML has grown or spread: Chronic phase, where less than 10% of cells in the blood and bone marrow are blast cells (leukemia cells). Most people are diagnosed in this phase, and many do not have symptoms. Standard treatment usually helps in this phase. Accelerated phase, 10% to 19% of the cells in the blood and bone marrow are blast cells. In this phase, people often have symptoms and standard treatment may not be as effective as in the chronic phase. Blastic phase, where 20% or more of the cells in the blood or bone marrow are blast cells. The blast cells have spread to other tissues and organs. If you have tiredness, fever, and an enlarged spleen during the blastic phase, it is called a blast crisis. This phase is harder to treat. What are the treatments for chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)? There are several different treatments for CML: Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. For CML, the drugs are tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). They block tyrosine kinase, which is an enzyme that causes your bone marrow to make too many blasts. Chemotherapy Immunotherapy High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI). DLI is a treatment that may be used after a stem cell transplant. It involves giving you an infusion (into your bloodstream) of healthy lymphocytes from the stem cell transplant donor. Lymphocytes are a type of white blood cell. These donor lymphocytes may kill the remaining cancer cells. Surgery to remove the spleen (splenectomy) Which treatments you get will depend on which phase you are in, your age, your overall health, and other factors. When the signs and symptoms of CML are reduced or have disappeared, it is called remission. The CML may come back after remission, and you may need more treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A polyp is an extra piece of tissue that grows inside your body. Colonic polyps grow in the large intestine, or colon.  Most polyps are not dangerous. However, some polyps may turn into cancer or already be cancer. To be safe, doctors remove polyps and test them.  Polyps can be removed when a doctor examines the inside of the large intestine during a colonoscopy . Anyone can get polyps, but certain people are more likely than others. You may have a greater chance of getting polyps if you : Are over age 50 Have had polyps before Have a family member with polyps Have a family history of colon cancer Most colon polyps do not cause symptoms. If you have symptoms, they may include blood on your underwear or on toilet paper after a bowel movement, blood in your stool, or constipation or diarrhea lasting more than a week. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is colorectal cancer? Colorectal cancer is cancer that develops in the tissues of the colon or rectum. Your colon and rectum are part of your digestive system: Your colon is the first and longest part of your large intestine. It absorbs water and some nutrients from foods. It also changes the leftover waste products into stool (poop). Your rectum is the lower part of your large intestine. It's where your body stores stool. Cancer that begins in the colon is called colon cancer, and cancer that begins in the rectum is called rectal cancer. Cancer that affects either of these parts may also be called colorectal cancer. What causes colorectal cancer? Colorectal cancer happens when there are changes in your genetic material (DNA) . These changes are also called mutations or variants. Often, the genetic changes that lead to colorectal cancer happen during your lifetime and the exact cause is unknown. But certain genetic changes that raise your risk for colorectal cancer are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Besides genetics, other factors, including your lifestyle and the environment, can affect your risk of colorectal cancer. Who is more likely to develop colorectal cancer? Anyone can get colorectal cancer, but certain factors make you more likely to develop it: Being older; your risk of getting colorectal cancer increases as you age. Having a personal or family history of colorectal cancer. Having a history of adenomas. Adenomas are colorectal polyps (growths) that look abnormal under a microscope or are 1 centimeter or larger. Adenomas are not cancer, but they can sometimes turn into cancer over time. Having a genetic syndrome such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or Lynch syndrome (hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer). Having chronic ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease for 8 years or more. Having three or more alcoholic drinks per day. Smoking cigarettes . Being Black; Black people have an increased risk of colorectal cancer and death from colorectal cancer compared to other races. Having obesity . What are the symptoms of colorectal cancer? Colorectal cancer may not always cause symptoms, especially at first. If you do have symptoms, they could include: A change in bowel habits that lasts more than a few days, such as: Diarrhea Constipation Feeling that the bowel does not empty completely Your stool is narrower or has a different shape than usual Blood (either bright red or very dark) in the stool Frequent gas pains, bloating, fullness, or cramps Weight loss for no known reason Fatigue What is screening for colorectal cancer and who needs it? Because colorectal cancer may not cause symptoms at first, it's important to have screening tests for colorectal cancer . Screening tests look for signs of a disease before you have any symptoms. They can help find cancer early, when it may be easier to treat. Most experts recommend that start screenings at 45 and continue until at least age 75. People over 75 and those who are at high risk should talk to their providers about how often you need screening and what type of test they should get. The types of tests include different stool tests and procedures such as colonoscopies and flexible sigmoidoscopy. Talk with your provider about how often you need screening and what type of test you should get. How is colorectal cancer diagnosed? If you have symptoms that could be caused by colorectal cancer or if your screening test results are abnormal, you may need to have more tests to find out if you have cancer. Possible tests include: A physical exam. A digital rectal exam. For this exam, your provider inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum to feel for lumps or anything unusual. The tests that are also used for screening (colonoscopy, stool tests, etc.) and biopsy , if you have not already had them. Other blood and tissue tests. What are the treatments for colorectal cancer? Your treatment options usually depend on your age, your general health, how serious the cancer is, and which type of cancer you have. For colon cancer , your treatment may include one or more of these options: Surgery. Radiofrequency ablation, a procedure that uses radio waves to heat and destroy abnormal cells. The radio waves travel through electrodes (small devices that carry electricity). Cryosurgery, a procedure in which an extremely cold liquid or an instrument called a cryoprobe is used to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. Chemotherapy . Radiation therapy . Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells. Immunotherapy . For rectal cancer , your treatment may include one or more of these options: Surgery. Radiation therapy. Chemotherapy. Active surveillance, which means having regular tests to see if your rectal cancer has changed. If the tests show the cancer is starting to grow, then you will have treatment to try to cure the cancer. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells. Immunotherapy. Can colorectal cancer be prevented? Avoiding the risk factors that you have control over may help prevent some cancers. That includes: Not smoking Limiting alcohol to under three drinks per day Managing your weight There are also other steps you can take to try to prevent colorectal cancer. They include: Getting regular colorectal cancer screenings Having polyps removed before they can become cancerous Getting regular exercise

The esophagus is a hollow tube that carries food and liquids from your throat to your stomach.  Early esophageal cancer usually does not cause symptoms. Later, you may have symptoms such as: Painful or difficult swallowing Weight loss A hoarse voice or cough that doesn't go away You're at greater risk for getting esophageal cancer if you smoke, drink heavily, or have acid reflux . Your risk also goes up as you age Your doctor uses imaging tests and a biopsy to diagnose esophageal cancer.  Treatments include surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.  You might also need nutritional support , since the cancer or treatment may make it hard to swallow. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Cancer of the eye is uncommon. It can affect the outer parts of the eye, such as the eyelid, which are made up of muscles, skin and nerves. If the cancer starts inside the eyeball it's called intraocular cancer. The most common intraocular cancers in adults are melanoma and lymphoma. The most common eye cancer in children is retinoblastoma, which starts in the cells of the retina.  Cancer can also spread to the eye from other parts of the body. Treatment for eye cancer varies by the type and by how advanced it is. It may include surgery, radiation therapy, freezing or heat therapy, or laser therapy.

Your gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ under your liver. It stores bile, a fluid made by your liver to digest fat. As your stomach and intestines digest food, your gallbladder releases bile through a tube called the common bile duct. The duct connects your gallbladder and liver to your small intestine. Cancer of the gallbladder is rare. It is more common in women and Native Americans. Symptoms include Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes) Pain above the stomach Fever Nausea and vomiting Bloating Lumps in the abdomen It is hard to diagnose gallbladder cancer in its early stages.  Sometimes doctors find it when they remove the gallbladder for another reason. But people with gallstones rarely have gallbladder cancer. Because it is often found late, it can be hard to treat gallbladder cancer. Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, or a combination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is head and neck cancer? Head and neck cancer is the name for cancers that develop in the mouth , nose and sinuses , salivary glands , and throat and voice box (larynx). Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell cancers . They begin in the moist tissues that line the head and neck. The cancer cells may spread into deeper tissue as the cancer grows. There are other cancers that develop in the head and neck, such as brain cancer , eye cancer , and esophageal cancer . But they are usually not considered to be head and neck cancers, because those types of cancer and their treatments are different. Who is more likely to develop head and neck cancer? Anyone can get head and neck cancer, but you are more likely to develop it if you: Use tobacco or drink lots of alcohol. Your risk of developing head and neck cancer is even higher if you do both. Are male. Are over age 50. Have a history of head or neck cancer. Have HPV (for cancers in the tonsils and base of the tongue). Are exposed to wood dusts or certain other toxic substances at work (for upper throat, nose, and sinus cancers). Have had radiation exposure to the head and neck (for salivary gland cancer). Have Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection (for upper throat and salivary gland cancers). Are Asian (for upper throat cancer). What are the symptoms of head and neck cancer? The symptoms of head and neck cancer may include: A lump in the neck A sore in the mouth or the throat that does not heal and may be painful A sore throat that does not go away Trouble swallowing A change or hoarseness in the voice Other possible symptoms can depend on the specific type of head and neck cancer. How is head and neck cancer diagnosed? Which exams and tests used to diagnose head and neck cancer can depend on the specific type of cancer. Possible exams and tests may include: A physical exam of the area that might have cancer. Blood and/or urine tests. An endoscopy . A biopsy or other procedure to collect cells from the area that might have cancer. The cells are viewed under a microscope to find out if they are abnormal. Imaging tests . What are the treatments for head and neck cancer? The treatment for head and neck cancer will depend on the specific type of cancer, the stage (how advanced the cancer is), your overall health, and other factors. The treatment options might include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Cancer immunotherapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that mainly attack specific cancer cells and cause less harm to normal cells In some cases, you may need a combination of treatments. Sometimes surgery can affect how well you can chew, swallow, or talk. Rehabilitation, such as physical therapy, dietary counseling, and speech therapy, may help. Can head and neck cancer be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent head and neck cancer: Not smoking Limiting alcohol use or not drinking at all Getting regular dental exams Talking to your provider about HPV vaccination NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is Hodgkin lymphoma? Hodgkin lymphoma, also called Hodgkin disease, is a type of cancer that develops in the lymph system. Your lymph system is part of your immune system . It helps protect your body from infection and disease. The lymph system is made up of tissues and organs that produce, store, and carry white blood cells. It includes your: Bone marrow Lymph nodes Lymphatic vessels Spleen Thymus Tonsils Hodgkin lymphoma is one of the main types of lymphoma . The other is non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Each type starts in different types of white blood cells. What causes Hodgkin lymphoma? The cause of Hodgkin lymphoma is unknown. But there are certain people who are at higher risk of developing it. Who is more likely to develop Hodgkin lymphoma? Certain factors can make you more likely to develop Hodgkin lymphoma: Age. Hodgkin lymphoma is most common in early adulthood (age 20-39 years) and in late adulthood (age 65 years and older). Being male. The risk of adult Hodgkin lymphoma is slightly higher in males than in females. Past Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Having an infection with EBV as a young child or teenager increases your risk of Hodgkin lymphoma. A family history of Hodgkin lymphoma. Having a parent or sibling with Hodgkin lymphoma increases your risk of developing it. What are the symptoms of Hodgkin lymphoma? The signs and symptoms of Hodgkin lymphoma may include: Painless, swollen lymph nodes in the neck, underarm, or groin Fever for no known reason Drenching night sweats (very heavy sweating during sleep) Weight loss for no known reason in the past 6 months Itchy skin, especially after bathing or drinking alcohol Fatigue How is Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosed? To find out if you have Hodgkin lymphoma, your provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history. This will include checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. May order some lab tests, such as: Complete blood count Blood chemistry studies Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) test Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) test Blood tests to rule out other medical conditions May do imaging tests such as a CT and PET (positron emission tomography) scans May do a lymph node biopsy What are the treatments for Hodgkin lymphoma? Treatments for Hodgkin lymphoma include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Cancer immunotherapy Hodgkin lymphoma can usually be cured if it is found and treated early. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your small intestine is part of your digestive system.  It is a long tube that connects your stomach to your large intestine. Intestinal cancer is rare, but eating a high-fat diet or having Crohn's disease , celiac disease, or a history of colonic polyps can increase your risk. Possible signs of small intestine cancer include: Abdominal pain Weight loss for no reason Blood in the stool A lump in the abdomen Imaging tests that create pictures of the small intestine and the area around it can help diagnose intestinal cancer and show whether it has spread. Surgery is the most common treatment. Additional options include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or a combination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is Kaposi sarcoma? Kaposi sarcoma, sometimes called KS, is a type of cancer. It causes lesions (abnormal tissue) to grow in different parts of the body, including: The skin Lymph nodes Mucous membranes (the lining of the mouth, nose, and throat) Other organs These lesions are usually red or purple. They are made of cancer cells, new blood vessels, and blood cells. The lesions may begin in more than one place in the body at the same time. This makes Kaposi sarcoma different from other cancers. What causes Kaposi sarcoma and who is more likely to develop it? Kaposi sarcoma is caused by infection with human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8). This virus is also called Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). Most people infected with this virus don't get Kaposi sarcoma. But certain people who get this virus are more likely to develop one of the types of Kaposi sarcoma: People with weakened immune systems due to HIV can develop epidemic (HIV-associated) Kaposi sarcoma. People with weakened immune systems due to medicines they need to take after an organ transplant can develop iatrogenic (transplant-related) Kaposi sarcoma. Older men of Mediterranean or Eastern European Jewish heritage can develop classic Kaposi sarcoma. Young men in Africa can develop endemic (African) Kaposi sarcoma. What are the symptoms of Kaposi sarcoma? Kaposi sarcoma usually starts out as one or more red, purple, or brown skin lesions on the legs and feet. They are most often on the ankles or soles of the feet. Over time, lesions may form in other parts of the body. The lesions may not cause symptoms. But sometimes the lesions can cause problems, especially as you get more of them and they grow bigger. For example: Pressure from the lesions may block the flow of lymph and blood in the legs and cause painful swelling If lesions grow in your stomach or intestines, they can bleed and may cause abdominal (belly) pain and diarrhea Lesions in the lungs can also bleed and may cause shortness of breath How is Kaposi sarcoma diagnosed? To find out whether you have Kaposi sarcoma, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical and family history Will do a physical exam May order a chest x-ray to look for Kaposi sarcoma in the lungs May do a biopsy to check for Kaposi sarcoma lesions in the skin May do an endoscopy to check for Kaposi sarcoma in the stomach and intestines May do a bronchoscopy to check for Kaposi sarcoma in the lungs If you do have Kaposi sarcoma, you will likely need blood and imaging tests to find out if the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. What are the treatments for Kaposi sarcoma? Which treatment(s) you get will depend on The type of Kaposi sarcoma you have How many lesions you have and where in the body they are What kinds of problems the lesions are causing Your overall health For people who have epidemic (HIV-associated) Kaposi sarcoma, taking HIV medicines may be enough to treat the Kaposi sarcoma. For people who have iatrogenic (transplant-related) Kaposi sarcoma, changing the dose of the medicines or switching medicines may be helpful. But some people with these types of Kaposi sarcoma will need additional treatment. The treatment options for Kaposi sarcoma may include: Radiation therapy Surgery Cryosurgery, a treatment that uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue Chemotherapy Immunotherapy NIH: National Cancer Institute

You have two kidneys. They are fist-sized organs on either side of your backbone above your waist. The tubes inside filter and clean your blood, taking out waste products and making urine.  Kidney cancer forms in the lining of tiny tubes inside your kidneys. Kidney cancer becomes more likely as you age. Risk factors include smoking, having certain genetic conditions, and misusing pain medicines for a long time. You may have no symptoms at first. They may appear as the cancer grows. See your health care provider if you notice: Blood in your urine A lump in your abdomen Weight loss for no reason Pain in your side that does not go away Loss of appetite Tests to diagnose kidney cancer include blood, urine, and imaging tests. You may also have a biopsy. Treatment depends on your age, your overall health and how advanced the cancer is. It might include surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation, biologic, or targeted therapies.  Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What are the types of leukemia? There are different types of leukemia. Which type of leukemia you have depends on the type of blood cell that becomes cancer and whether it grows quickly or slowly. The type of blood cell could be: Lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell Myeloid cells, immature cells that become white blood cells, red blood cells, or platelets The different types can grow quickly or slowly: Acute leukemia is fast growing. It usually gets worse quickly if it's not treated. Chronic leukemia is slow growing. It usually gets worse over a longer period of time. The main types of leukemia are: Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) , which is the most common type of cancer in children. It can also affect adults. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) , which is more common in older adults but can also affect children Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) , which is one of the most common types of leukemia in adults. It often occurs during or after middle age. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) , which usually occurs in adults during or after middle age What causes leukemia? Leukemia happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Who is at risk for leukemia? For the specific types, there are different factors which can raise your risk of getting that type. Overall, your risk of leukemia goes up as you age. It is most common over age 60. What are the symptoms of leukemia? Some of the symptoms of leukemia may include: Feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Weight loss or loss of appetite Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Other leukemia symptoms can be different from type to type. Chromic leukemia may not cause symptoms at first. How is leukemia diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose leukemia: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) Bone marrow tests . There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes Once the provider makes a diagnosis, there may be additional tests to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture, which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for leukemia? The treatments for leukemia depend on which type you have, how severe the leukemia is, your age, your overall health, and other factors. Some possible treatments might include: Chemotherapy Radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. Primary liver cancer starts in the liver.  Metastatic liver cancer starts somewhere else and spreads to your liver. Risk factors for primary liver cancer include : Having hepatitis B or C Heavy alcohol use Having cirrhosis , or scarring of the liver Having hemochromatosis , an iron storage disease Obesity and diabetes Symptoms can include a lump or pain on the right side of your abdomen and yellowing of the skin. However, you may not have symptoms until the cancer is advanced.  This makes it harder to treat. Doctors use tests that examine the liver and the blood to diagnose liver cancer. Treatment options include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or liver transplantation . NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is lung cancer? Lung cancer is cancer that forms in tissues of the lung, usually in the cells that line the air passages. It is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women. There are two main types: small cell lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer . These two types grow differently and are treated differently. Non-small cell lung cancer is the more common type. Who more likely to develop lung cancer? Anyone can develop lung cancer, but certain factors raise your risk of getting it: Smoking . This is the most important risk factor for lung cancer. Tobacco smoking causes about 9 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in men and about 8 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in women. The more years you smoke and the more cigarettes you smoke each day, the more your risk goes up.  Your risk is also greater if you smoke a lot and drink alcohol every day or take beta carotene supplements. If you have quit smoking, your risk will be lower than if you had kept smoking. But you will still have a higher risk than people who never smoked. Secondhand smoke , which is the combination of the smoke that comes from a cigarette and the smoke breathed out by a smoker. When you breathe in secondhand smoke, you are exposed to the same cancer-causing agents as smokers, although in smaller amounts. A family history of lung cancer. Being exposed to asbestos , arsenic , chromium, beryllium, nickel, soot, or tar in the workplace. Being exposed to radiation , for example from: Radiation therapy to the breast or chest Radon in the home or workplace Certain imaging tests such as CT scans HIV infection . Your risk is higher if you have HIV. However, smoking rates are higher in people who have HIV, so it's not clear whether the increased risk is from the HIV infection or from smoking. Air pollution . Studies show that living in areas with higher levels of air pollution increases your risk of lung cancer. What are the symptoms of lung cancer? Lung cancer may not cause any signs or symptoms until the cancer is advanced. Sometimes the cancer is found during a chest x-ray done for another condition. The symptoms of lung cancer may include: Chest pain or discomfort A cough that doesn't go away or gets worse over time Coughing up blood Trouble breathing Wheezing Hoarseness Loss of appetite Weight loss for no known reason Feeling very tired Trouble swallowing Swelling in the face and/or veins in the neck How is lung cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have lung cancer, your health care provider: Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Will ask about your family history Will do a physical exam May order certain imaging tests, such as a chest x-ray or chest CT scan May order lab tests, including tests of your blood and sputum May do a procedure to take a biopsy of the lung If you do have lung cancer, your provider will do other tests to find out if it has spread through the lungs, lymph nodes, and the rest of the body. This is called staging. Knowing the type and stage of lung cancer you have helps your provider decide what kind of treatment you need. If you have small-cell lung cancer, your provider may also do genetic testing to look for certain gene changes ( variants ) in your cancer cells. The results of the testing may help guide treatment. What are the treatments for lung cancer? For most patients with lung cancer, current treatments do not cure the cancer. Your treatment will depend on which type of lung cancer you have, how far it has spread, your overall health, and other factors. You may get more than one type of treatment. The treatments for small cell lung cancer may include: Surgery. Chemotherapy . Radiation therapy. Immunotherapy . Laser therapy, which uses a laser beam to kill cancer cells. Endoscopic stent placement. An endoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument used to look at tissues inside the body. It may be used to put in a device called a stent. The stent helps to open an airway that has been blocked by abnormal tissue. The treatments for non-small cell lung cancer may include: Surgery. Radiation therapy. Chemotherapy. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Immunotherapy. Laser therapy. Photodynamic therapy (PDT), which uses a medicine and a certain type of laser light to kill cancer cells. Cryosurgery, which uses an instrument to freeze and destroy abnormal tissue. Electrocautery, a treatment that uses a probe or needle heated by an electric current to destroy abnormal tissue. Can lung cancer be prevented? Avoiding the risk factors may help prevent lung cancer. For example, you can: Quit smoking . And if you don't smoke, don't start. Lower your exposure to hazardous substances at work. Lower your exposure to radon. Radon tests can show whether your home has high levels of radon. You can buy a test kit yourself or hire a professional to do the test. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Lymphoma is a cancer of a part of the immune system called the lymph system.  There are many types of lymphoma.  One type is Hodgkin disease .  The rest are called non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas begin when a type of white blood cell, called a T cell or B cell, becomes abnormal. The cell divides again and again, making more and more abnormal cells. These abnormal cells can spread to almost any other part of the body. Most of the time, doctors don't know why a person gets non-Hodgkin lymphoma. You are at increased risk if you have a weakened immune system or have certain types of infections. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma can cause many symptoms, such as : Swollen, painless lymph nodes in the neck, armpits or groin Unexplained weight loss Fever Soaking night sweats Coughing, trouble breathing or chest pain Weakness and tiredness that don't go away Pain, swelling or a feeling of fullness in the abdomen Your doctor will diagnose lymphoma with a physical exam, blood tests, a chest x-ray, and a biopsy.  Treatments include chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, biological therapy, or therapy to remove proteins from the blood. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. If you don't have symptoms, you may not need treatment right away. This is called watchful waiting. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Although breast cancer is much more common in women, men can get it too. It happens most often to men between the ages of 60 and 70. Breast lumps usually aren't cancer. However, most men with breast cancer have lumps. Other breast symptoms can include: Dimpled or puckered skin A red, scaly nipple or skin Fluid discharge Risk factors for male breast cancer include exposure to radiation, a family history of breast cancer, and having high estrogen levels, which can happen with diseases like cirrhosis or Klinefelter syndrome . Treatment for male breast cancer is usually a mastectomy , which is surgery to remove the breast. Other treatments include radiation, chemotherapy and/or hormone therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Melanoma is the most serious type of skin cancer .  Often the first sign of melanoma is a change in the size, shape, color, or feel of a mole. Most melanomas have a black or black-blue area. Melanoma may also appear as a new mole. It may be black, abnormal, or "ugly looking." Thinking of "ABCDE" can help you remember what to watch for: Asymmetry - the shape of one half does not match the other Border - the edges are ragged, blurred or irregular Color - the color is uneven and may include shades of black, brown and tan Diameter - there is a change in size, usually an increase Evolving - the mole has changed over the past few weeks or months Surgery is the first treatment of all stages of melanoma. Other treatments include chemotherapy and radiation, biologic, and targeted therapies.  Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. Targeted therapy uses substances that attack cancer cells without harming normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The tissue that lines your lungs, stomach, heart, and other organs is called mesothelium. Mesothelioma, also known as malignant mesothelioma, is cancer of that tissue. It usually starts in the lungs, but can also start in the abdomen or other organs. Malignant mesothelioma is rare but serious. Most people who get it have worked or lived in places where they inhaled or swallowed asbestos particles. After being exposed to asbestos, it usually takes a long time for the disease to form. Symptoms include: Trouble breathing Cough Pain under the rib cage Pain, swelling, or lumps in the abdomen Weight loss for no known reason Blood clots Constipation Fatigue Sometimes it is hard to tell the difference between malignant mesothelioma and lung cancer. To find out if you have mesothelioma, your health care provider will likely use a physical exam, imaging tests , and a biopsy . Malignant mesothelioma is often found when it is advanced. This makes it harder to treat. Treatment options may include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Immunotherapy Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells NIH: National Cancer Institute

Multiple myeloma is a cancer that begins in plasma cells, a type of white blood cell. These cells are part of your immune system, which helps protect the body from germs and other harmful substances. In time, myeloma cells collect in the bone marrow and in the solid parts of bones. No one knows the exact causes of multiple myeloma, but it is more common in older people and African Americans. It can run in families. Common symptoms may include: Bone pain, often in the back or ribs Fractures (broken bones) Weakness or fatigue Weight loss Frequent infections and fevers Feeling very thirsty Frequent urination Doctors diagnose multiple myeloma using lab tests, imaging tests, and a bone marrow biopsy.  Your treatment depends on how advanced the disease is and whether you have symptoms.  If you have no symptoms, you may not need treatment right away. If you have symptoms, you may have chemotherapy, stem cell transplantation, radiation, or targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your paranasal sinuses are small hollow spaces around the nose. They are lined with cells that make mucus, which keeps your nose from drying out. The nasal cavity is the passageway just behind your nose. Air passes through it on the way to your throat as you breathe. Cancer of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses is rare.  You are at greater risk if you are: Male and over 40 years old Exposed to certain workplace chemicals Infected with HPV A smoker There may be no symptoms at first, and later symptoms can be like those of infections. Doctors diagnose nasal cancer with imaging tests, lighted tube-like instruments that look inside the nose, and biopsies. Treatment options include surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is neuroblastoma? Neuroblastoma is a type of cancer that forms in nerve cells called neuroblasts. Neuroblasts are immature nerve tissue. They normally turn into working nerve cells. But in neuroblastoma, they form a tumor. Neuroblastoma usually begins in the adrenal glands . You have two adrenal glands, one on top of each kidney. The adrenal glands make important hormones that help control heart rate, blood pressure, blood glucose (blood sugar), and the way the body reacts to stress. Neuroblastoma may also begin in the neck, chest or spinal cord. What causes neuroblastoma? Neuroblastoma is caused by changes in your genes . Gene changes also called gene variants or mutations. In most cases, the cause of the mutation is unknown. In some other cases, the mutation is passed from the parent to the child. What are the symptoms of neuroblastoma? Neuroblastoma often begins in early childhood . Sometimes it begins before a child is born.The most common symptoms are caused by the tumor pressing on nearby tissues as it grows or by cancer spreading to the bone.They include: A lump in the abdomen, neck, or chest Bulging eyes Dark circles around the eyes Bone pain Swollen stomach and trouble breathing in babies Painless, bluish lumps under the skin in babies Weakness or paralysis (loss of ability to move a body part) How is neuroblastoma diagnosed? To diagnose neuroblastoma, your child's health care provider will do various tests and procedures, which may include: A medical history. A neurological exam . Imaging test s, such as x-rays , a CT scan , an ultrasound , an MRI , or an MIBG scan. In an MIBG scan, a small amount of a radioactive substance is injected into a vein. It travels through the bloodstream and attaches itself to any neuroblastoma cells. A scanner detects the cells. Blood and urine tests. Biopsy , in which a sample of tissue is removed and examined under a microscope. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, in which bone marrow, blood, and a small piece of bone are removed for testing. What are the treatments for neuroblastoma? The treatments for neuroblastoma include: Observation, also called watchful waiting, is where the health care provider does not give any treatments until your child's signs or symptoms appear or change. Surgery Radiation therapy . Chemotherapy . High-dose chemotherapy and radiation therapy with stem cell rescue. Your child will get high doses of chemotherapy and radiation. This kills the cancer cells, but it also kills healthy cells. So your child will get a stem cell transplant , usually of his or her own cells collected earlier. This helps to replace the healthy cells that were lost. Iodine 131-MIBG therapy, a treatment with radioactive iodine. The radioactive iodine collects in neuroblastoma cells and kills them with the radiation that is given off. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Neurofibromatosis is a genetic disorder of the nervous system. It mainly affects how nerve cells form and grow. It causes tumors to grow on nerves.  You can get neurofibromatosis from your parents, or it can happen because of a mutation (change) in your genes.  Once you have it, you can pass it along to your children. Usually the tumors are benign, but sometimes they can become cancerous. There are three types of neurofibromatosis: Type 1 (NF1) causes skin changes and deformed bones. It usually starts in childhood.  Sometimes the symptoms are present at birth. Type 2 (NF2) causes hearing loss, ringing in the ears, and poor balance. Symptoms often start in the teen years. Schwannomatosis causes intense pain. It is the rarest type. Doctors diagnose the different types based on the symptoms. Genetic testing is also used to diagnose NF1 and NF2. There is no cure. Treatment can help control symptoms. Depending on the type of disease and how serious it is, treatment may include surgery to remove tumors, radiation therapy, and medicines. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is oral cancer? Oral cancer is cancer of the mouth. It is a type of head and neck cancer . Most oral cancers are squamous cell cancers . They begin in the flat cells that cover the surfaces of your mouth, tongue, and lips. The cancer cells may spread into deeper tissue as the cancer grows. Most oral cancers are related to tobacco use, heavy alcohol use, or an HPV infection . Who is more likely to develop oral cancer? Anyone can get oral cancer, but you are more likely to develop it if you: Use tobacco or drink lots of alcohol. Your risk of developing oral cancer is even higher if you do both. Are male. Are over ago 40. Have HPV. Have a history of head or neck cancer. Get frequent sun exposure (for lip cancer). What are the symptoms of oral cancer? The symptoms of oral cancer may include: A white or red patch in your mouth A lip or mouth sore that won't heal Bleeding, pain, or numbness in the lip or mouth Loose teeth or dentures that no longer fit well Problems or pain with swallowing A lump in your neck Ear pain Trouble moving your mouth or jaw Swelling of the jaw A sore throat or feeling that something is caught in the throat If you have any of these symptoms for more than two weeks, see your health care provider or dentist. Oral cancer can spread quickly, so it's important to find it early. How is oral cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have oral cancer, your provider may use: A physical exam of the lips and mouth. An endoscopy . A biopsy or other procedure to collect cells from the lip or oral cavity. The cells are viewed under a microscope to find out if they are abnormal. Imaging tests . What are the treatments for oral cancer? The treatments for oral cancer include surgery, radiation therapy , or both. After surgery, some people also need chemotherapy to kill any cancer cells that are left. Can oral cancer be prevented? There are steps you can take to help prevent oral cancer: Not smoking Limiting alcohol use or not drinking at all Getting regular dental exams NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is ovarian cancer? Cancer is a disease in which abnormal cells in the body grow out of control and form a tumor. Ovarian cancer is a cancerous tumor that forms in the tissues of an ovary. The ovaries are a pair of female reproductive glands that make eggs and female hormones . What are the types of ovarian cancer? There are a few different types of ovarian cancer. The most common type is epithelial cancer. It begins in the cells that cover the ovary. There are also two related types of epithelial cancer that can spread to the ovaries: Fallopian tube cancer forms in the tissue lining a fallopian tube. The fallopian tubes are a pair of long, slender tubes on each side of the uterus. The uterus is the female reproductive organ where a baby grows during pregnancy. Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the tissue lining the peritoneum. Your peritoneum is a tissue lining that covers the organs in the abdomen (belly). These two cancers are similar to ovarian cancer, and they have the same treatments. So some medical experts also consider those two types as ovarian cancer. Some other rarer types of ovarian cancer are malignant germ cell tumors and stromal tumors. What causes ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer happens when there are changes (mutations) in the genetic material (DNA). Often, the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Most ovarian cancers are caused by genetic changes that happen during your lifetime. But sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Ovarian cancer that is caused by inherited genetic changes is called hereditary ovarian cancer. There are also certain genetic changes that can raise your risk of ovarian cancer, including changes called BRCA1 and BRCA2 . These two changes also raise your risk of breast and other cancers. Besides genetics, your lifestyle and the environment can affect your risk of ovarian cancer. Who is more likely to develop ovarian cancer? Certain people are more likely to develop ovarian cancer. They include those who: Have a family history of ovarian cancer in a mother, daughter, or sister Have inherited changes in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Have certain other genetic conditions, such as Lynch syndrome Have endometriosis Took hormone replacement therapy Are overweight or have obesity Are tall Are older, especially those who have gone through menopause What are the symptoms of ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer may not cause early signs or symptoms. By the time you do have signs or symptoms, the cancer is often advanced. The signs and symptoms may include: Pain, swelling, or a feeling of pressure in the abdomen or pelvis Sudden or frequent urge to urinate (pee) Trouble eating or feeling full A lump in the pelvic area Gastrointestinal problems, such as gas , bloating, or constipation How is ovarian cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have ovarian cancer, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Will ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had ovarian cancer Will do a physical exam , including a pelvic exam Will likely do imaging tests May do blood tests such as a CA-125 blood test Often the only way to know for sure that you have ovarian cancer is by having a biopsy of the tissue. A biopsy is done during surgery to remove the tumor. What are the treatments for ovarian cancer? Treatments for ovarian cancer may include: Surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible Chemotherapy Targeted therapy , which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Your provider may suggest that you have genetic testing to look for the gene changes that raise the risk for ovarian cancer. Knowing whether or not you have the gene change may help your provider decide on your treatment plan. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces the juices that help break down food and the hormones that help control blood sugar levels. Pancreatic cancer usually begins in the cells that produce the juices. Some risk factors for developing pancreatic cancer include: Smoking Long-term diabetes Chronic pancreatitis Certain hereditary disorders Pancreatic cancer is hard to catch early. It doesn't cause symptoms right away. When you do get symptoms, they are often vague or you may not notice them. They include yellowing of the skin and eyes, pain in the abdomen and back, weight loss and fatigue. Also, because the pancreas is hidden behind other organs, health care providers cannot see or feel the tumors during routine exams. Doctors use a physical exam, blood tests, imaging tests, and a biopsy to diagnose it. Because it is often found late and it spreads quickly, pancreatic cancer can be hard to treat.  Possible treatments include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Pheochromocytoma is a rare tumor that usually starts in the cells of one of your adrenal glands. Although they are usually benign , pheochromocytomas often cause the adrenal gland to make too many hormones. This can lead to high blood pressure and cause  symptoms such as : Headaches Sweating Pounding of the heart Being shaky Being extremely pale Sometimes pheochromocytoma is part of another condition called multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome (MEN). People with MEN often have other cancers and other problems involving hormones. Doctors use lab tests and imaging tests to diagnose it. Surgery is the most common treatment.  Other options include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your pituitary gland is a pea-sized gland at the base of your brain. The pituitary is the "master control gland" - it makes hormones that affect growth and the functions of other glands in the body. Pituitary tumors are common, but often they don't cause health problems. Most people with pituitary tumors never even know they have them. The most common type of pituitary tumor produces hormones and disrupts the balance of hormones in your body. This can cause endocrine diseases such as Cushing's syndrome and hyperthyroidism . Symptoms of pituitary tumors include: Headaches Vision problems Nausea and vomiting Problems caused by the production of too many hormones Pituitary tumors are usually curable. Treatment is often surgery to remove the tumor. Other options include medicines, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.

What is prostate cancer? Cancer is a disease in which cells in the body grow out of control. Prostate cancer begins in the cells of the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer. It often grows very slowly. If it does not spread to other parts of the body, it may not cause serious problems. But sometimes prostate cancer can grow quickly and spread to other parts of the body. This kind of prostate cancer is serious. What causes prostate cancer? Researchers don't know for sure what causes prostate cancer. They do know that it happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA). Sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. There are also certain genetic changes that happen during your lifetime that can raise your risk of prostate cancer. But often the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Who is more likely to develop prostate cancer? Anyone who has a prostate can develop prostate cancer. But certain factors can make you more likely to develop it: Age. Your chance of developing prostate cancer increases as you get older. Prostate cancer is rare in people under age 50. Family health history. Your risk of prostate cancer is higher if you have a parent, sibling, or child who has or has had prostate cancer. Race. African Americans are more likely to get prostate cancer.  They're also more likely to: Get prostate cancer at a younger age. Have more serious prostate cancer. Die from prostate cancer. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? Prostate cancer doesn't always cause symptoms, especially at first. If it does cause symptoms, they may include: Problems urinating (peeing), such as: A urine stream that's weak, hard to start, or starts and stops Suddenly needing to urinate right away Urinating often, especially at night Pain or burning when urinating Blood in your urine or semen Pain in your lower back , hips, or pelvis that does not go away Painful ejaculation (the release of semen through the penis during orgasm) But many of these symptoms may be from other common prostate problems that aren't cancer, such as an enlarged prostate . You should discuss your prostate health with your health care provider if you: Have symptoms that could be prostate cancer Have a high risk for developing prostate cancer Had a screening test that suggests you could have prostate cancer What are prostate tests and how is prostate cancer diagnosed? Tests which check for prostate cancer include: A digital rectal exam (DRE). In this exam, your provider feels your prostate for lumps or anything unusual by inserting a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum. A prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test. A high PSA blood level may be a sign of prostate cancer. But many other things can cause high PSA levels, too. Imaging tests. These tests may use ultrasound or MRI to make pictures of your prostate. If these tests show that you might have prostate cancer, the next step is usually a prostate biopsy . A biopsy is the only way to diagnose prostate cancer. During a biopsy, a doctor uses a hollow needle to remove some prostate tissue. The tissue is studied under a microscope to look for cancer cells. What are the treatments for prostate cancer? Your treatment options usually depend on your age, your general health, and how serious the cancer is. Your treatment may include one or more of options: Observation ,which is mostly used if you are older, your prostate cancer isn't likely to grow quickly, and you don't have symptoms or you have other medical conditions. Your doctor will keep checking on your cancer over time so to see whether you will need to start treatment for the cancer. There are two types of observation: Watchful waiting means having little or no testing. If symptoms begin or change, you will get treatment to relieve them, but not to treat the cancer. Active surveillance means having regular tests to see if your prostate cancer has changed. If the tests show the cancer is starting to grow or if you develop symptoms, then you will have treatment to try to cure the cancer. Surgery to remove your prostate gland may be an option if your cancer hasn't spread outside of your prostate. Radiation therapy uses high energy to kill cancer cells or prevent them from growing. Hormone therapy blocks cancer cells from getting the hormones they need to grow. It may include taking medicines or having surgery to remove the testicles. Chemotherapy uses medicines to kill cancer cells, slow their growth, or stop them from spreading. You might take the drugs by mouth, as an injection (shot), as a cream, or intravenously (by IV). Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells. This treatment causes less harm to healthy cells than radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Immunotherapy helps your own immune system to fight cancer. Can prostate cancer be prevented? Making healthy lifestyle changes may help to prevent some prostate cancers. These changes include: Being at a healthy weight Quitting smoking Getting enough exercise Eating healthy foods NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is cancer screening? Cancer is a disease when the cells of the body grow out of control. Cancer screening is having tests to look for signs of cancer before you have any symptoms. By the time cancer causes symptoms, it may have already spread to other parts of your body. A screening test may help find cancer early, when it may be easier to treat. Cancer screening only tells you whether you might have cancer. It doesn't diagnose cancer. If a screening test shows signs of cancer, you'll need to have other tests to find out if you do have cancer and how serious it may be. What is prostate cancer screening? Prostate cancer screening looks for signs of cancer in the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. Prostate cancer is most common in people over age 50. It usually grows slowly and doesn't cause health problems. In fact, it's possible to live a long life with prostate cancer and never know you have it. But in certain cases, prostate cancer may spread to other parts of the body and can be very serious. The goal of prostate cancer screening is to find prostate cancers that may be more likely to spread so they can be treated early. What tests screen for prostate cancer? Two tests are commonly used to screen for prostate cancer: A prostate-specific antigen test , also called a PSA blood test. PSA is a protein made by your prostate. A high level of PSA in your blood may mean you have prostate cancer, but it's not proof of cancer.  That's because many other things may cause high PSA levels, including: Having an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH) Having other common prostate problems Taking certain medicines In general, the higher your PSA, the more likely it is that you have cancer. But a low PSA blood level isn't a guarantee that you don't have cancer. Digital Rectal Examination (DRE). The DRE is a prostate exam.  In this exam, your health care provider inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for lumps or anything unusual. A DRE can check only one side of the prostate. A PSA test or a DRE may be able to detect prostate cancer at an early stage. But it is not clear whether early detection and treatment lower the risk of dying from prostate cancer. You should talk with your provider about the benefits and harms of prostate cancer screening. What are the possible benefits and harms of prostate cancer screening? The possible benefits of prostate cancer screening include: Finding and treating prostate cancer early before it spreads Getting a better sense of your prostate cancer risk (based on your PSA test) Peace of mind if your screening shows you're unlikely to have prostate cancer now The option to choose further testing and closely monitor your prostate if your screening shows you may have cancer The possible harms of prostate cancer screening include: Getting a false positive result. This means that your PSA test shows you may have prostate cancer when you really don't. A false positive may lead to: Worry while you have more tests to look for signs of cancer. A prostate biopsy .  In a biopsy, a doctor removes tissue from your prostate so it can be studied under a microscope to look for cancer cells. This is the only way to diagnose cancer. The possible harms of a prostate biopsy include: Fever Pain Blood in semen Urinary tract infection Having prostate cancer treatment that you may not have needed. Prostate cancer screening may lead to a cancer diagnosis, but it's not always clear whether the cancer is likely to grow and spread. You could have unnecessary treatment for cancer that would never have caused any health problems. And the common prostate cancer treatments may have serious, permanent complications, such as: Urinary incontinence Erectile dysfunction Problems controlling your bowel movements (BMs) Should I be screened for prostate cancer? Since there are benefits and risks to prostate screening, you should talk with your provider to decide if screening is right for you. You and your provider should consider: Your age. The risk of prostate cancer increases after age 50. Your family health history. If members of your family have had prostate cancer, your risk may be higher. Your race. Prostate cancer is more common in African Americans.  They also have a higher risk of developing prostate cancer at a younger age and having more serious disease. Your general health. Are you well enough to have treatment for prostate cancer if it's found? What you prefer. How do you feel about the possible benefits and harms of screening, diagnosis, and treatment? NIH: National Cancer Institute

Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment. It uses high doses of radiation to kill cancer cells and stop them from spreading. About half of all cancer patients receive it. The radiation may be external, from special machines, or internal, from radioactive substances that a doctor places inside your body. The type of radiation therapy you receive depends on many factors, including: The type of cancer The size of the cancer The cancer's location in the body How close the cancer is to normal tissues that are sensitive to radiation How far into the body the radiation needs to travel Your general health and medical history Whether you will have other types of cancer treatment Other factors, such as your age and other medical conditions Radiation therapy can damage normal cells as well as cancer cells. Treatment must be carefully planned to minimize side effects. Common side effects include skin changes and fatigue. Other side effects depend on the part of your body being treated. Sometimes radiation is used with other treatments, like surgery or chemotherapy . NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your salivary glands make saliva - sometimes called spit - and empty it into your mouth through openings called ducts. Saliva makes your food moist, which helps you chew and swallow. It helps you digest your food. It also cleans your mouth and contains antibodies that can kill germs. Salivary gland cancer is a type of head and neck cancer . It is rare. It may not cause any symptoms, or you could notice: A lump in your ear, cheek, jaw, lip, or inside the mouth Fluid draining from your ear Trouble swallowing or opening the mouth widely Numbness, weakness, or pain in your face Doctors diagnose salivary gland cancer using a physical exam, imaging tests, and a biopsy. Treatment can include surgery, radiation therapy, and/or chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer in the United States. The two most common types are basal cell cancer and squamous cell cancer. They usually form on the head, face, neck, hands, and arms. Another type of skin cancer, melanoma , is more dangerous but less common. Anyone can get skin cancer, but it is more common in people who : Spend a lot of time in the sun or have been sunburned Have light-colored skin, hair and eyes Have a family member with skin cancer Are over age 50 You should have your doctor check any suspicious skin markings and any changes in the way your skin looks. Treatment is more likely to work well when cancer is found early.  If not treated, some types of skin cancer cells can spread to other tissues and organs. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, photodynamic therapy (PDT), and biologic therapy. PDT uses a drug and a type of laser light to kill cancer cells. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your soft tissues connect, support, or surround other tissues. Examples include your muscles, tendons, fat, and blood vessels. Soft tissue sarcoma is a cancer of these soft tissues. There are many kinds, based on the type of tissue they started in. They may cause a lump or swelling in the soft tissue. Sometimes they spread and can press on nerves and organs, causing problems such as pain or trouble breathing. No one knows exactly what causes these cancers. They are not common, but you have a higher risk if you have been exposed to certain chemicals, have had radiation therapy, or have certain genetic diseases. Doctors diagnose soft tissue sarcomas with a biopsy. Treatments include surgery to remove the tumor, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The stomach is an organ between the esophagus and the small intestine. It mixes food with stomach acid and helps digest protein. Stomach cancer mostly affects older people - two-thirds of people who have it are over age 65. Your risk of getting it is also higher if you: Have had a Helicobacter pylori infection Have had stomach inflammation Are a man Eat lots of  salted, smoked, or pickled foods Smoke cigarettes Have a family history of stomach cancer It is hard to diagnose stomach cancer in its early stages. Indigestion and stomach discomfort can be symptoms of early cancer, but other problems can cause the same symptoms. In advanced cases, there may be blood in your stool, vomiting, unexplained weight loss, jaundice, or trouble swallowing. Doctors diagnose stomach cancer with a physical exam, blood and imaging tests, an endoscopy, and a biopsy. Because it is often found late, it can be hard to treat stomach cancer.  Treatment options include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation or a combination. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is a cancer that develops in the tissues of one or both testicles. The testicles, or testes, are part of the male reproductive system. They make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped glands inside the scrotum, a sac of loose skin that lies below the penis. You can get cancer in one or both testicles. Who is most likely to develop testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is very rare. You can get it at any age, but it is most common in men between the ages of 20 and 39.  It is also more common in those who: Have had abnormal testicle development Have had an undescended testicle, a condition in which one or both testicles fail to move into the scrotum before birth Have had testicle cancer before Have a family history of the cancer Are White What are the symptoms of testicular cancer? The symptoms of testicular cancer may include: A painless lump or swelling in either testicle A change in how the testicle feels A dull ache in the lower abdomen (belly) or the groin (the area where the thigh meets the abdomen) A sudden build-up of fluid in the scrotum Pain or discomfort in a testicle or in the scrotum How is testicular cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have testicular cancer, your health care provider may use: A physical exam. Blood tests. An ultrasound of the testicles. An inguinal orchiectomy, which is a procedure to remove the entire testicle. A tissue sample from the testicle is viewed under a microscope to check for cancer cells. What are the treatments for testicular cancer? Testicular cancer can usually be cured.The treatment options include: Surgery (if the testicle has not already been removed during diagnosis). Radiation therapy . Chemotherapy . High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant . Surveillance, which might be done after surgery. It means that your provider will closely follow your condition with regular exams and tests. You won't get any further treatment unless there are changes in your test results. Some of the treatments may also cause infertility . If you may want to have children later on, you should consider sperm banking before treatment. After you have finished your treatment, you will need regular follow-up testing to make sure that the cancer has not come back. If you have had cancer in one testicle, you have a higher risk of getting cancer in the other testicle. So it's important to check the other testicle regularly and let your provider know if you notice any changes or unusual symptoms. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Throat cancer is a type of head and neck cancer . Throat cancer has different names, depending on which part of the throat is affected. The different parts of your throat are called the oropharynx, the hypopharynx, the nasopharynx, and the larynx, or voice box. The main risk factors for throat cancer are using tobacco heavy drinking. Certain types of throat cancer also have other risk factors. For example, having HPV is a risk factor for oropharyngeal cancer. Symptoms of throat cancer may include: A sore throat that does not go away A lump in the neck Pain or ringing in the ears Trouble swallowing Ear pain To diagnose throat cancers, doctors may do a physical exam and history, imaging tests, and a biopsy. You may also need other tests, depending on the type of cancer. Treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Treatment for some types of throat cancer may also include targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The thymus is a small organ in your upper chest, under your breastbone. Before birth and during childhood, the thymus helps the body make a type of white blood cell. These cells help protect you from infections. Cancer of the thymus is rare. You are more likely to get it if you have other diseases such as myasthenia gravis, lupus or rheumatoid arthritis. Sometimes there are no symptoms.  Other times, thymus cancer can cause: A cough that doesn't go away Chest pain Trouble breathing Doctors use a physical exam, imaging tests, and a biopsy to diagnose thymus cancer. The most common treatment is surgery to remove the tumor. Other options include radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and hormone therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is thyroid cancer? Thyroid cancer is a cancer that starts in the tissues of the thyroid. Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. What are the different types of thyroid cancer? There are different types of thyroid cancer; the main ones include: Differentiated thyroid cancer, which includes papillary cancer and follicular cancer Medullary thyroid cancer Anaplastic thyroid cancer Who is more likely to develop thyroid cancer? Certain people are more likely to develop thyroid cancer. Your risk is higher if you: Are between ages 25 and 65 Are a woman Are Asian Were exposed to certain types of radiation, including from radiation treatments to your head or neck as a child or from a radiation emergency Have had a goiter (enlarged thyroid) Having certain genetic conditions , including certain types of multiple endocrine neoplasia Have a family history of thyroid cancer or thyroid disease What are the symptoms of thyroid cancer? Thyroid cancer may not cause symptoms at first. It is sometimes found during a routine physical exam. You may get signs or symptoms as the cancer gets bigger. The symptoms may include: A lump (nodule) in the neck Trouble breathing Trouble swallowing Pain when swallowing Hoarseness or other changes to your voice that do not get better How is thyroid cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have thyroid cancer, your health care provider may use: A physical exam, including checking your neck for swelling, lumps, or anything that seems unusual A medical history Thyroid tests Other blood or imaging tests A biopsy What are the treatments for thyroid cancer? Treatment for thyroid cancer depends on the type of cancer you have and whether the cancer has spread. Often, more than one type of treatment may be needed. The treatment options include: Surgery. Radiation therapy, including radioactive iodine therapy. Chemotherapy . Thyroid hormone therapy. Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. Watchful waiting, which means that you don't get treatment right away. Your regularly checks to see if your signs or symptoms appear or change. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Tumors during pregnancy are rare, but they can happen. Tumors can be either benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer. Malignant ones are. The most common cancers in pregnancy are breast cancer, cervical cancer, lymphoma, and melanoma.  Cancer itself rarely harms the baby, and some cancer treatments are safe during pregnancy.  You and your health care provider will work together to find the best treatment.  Your options will depend on how far along the pregnancy is, as well as the type, size, and stage of your cancer. Another type of tumor that women can get is called a gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD). It happens when a fertilized egg doesn't become a fetus.  GTD is not always easy to find.  It is usually benign, but some types can be malignant. The most common type of GTD is a molar pregnancy. In its early stages, it may look like a normal pregnancy. You should see your health care provider if you have vaginal bleeding (not menstrual bleeding). Treatment depends on the type of tumor, whether it has spread to other places, and your overall health.

The uterus , or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a women is pregnant. There are different types of uterine cancer. The most common type starts in the endometrium, the lining of the uterus. This type is also called endometrial cancer. The symptoms of uterine cancer include: Abnormal vaginal bleeding or discharge Trouble urinating Pelvic pain Pain during intercourse Uterine cancer usually happens after menopause. It is more common in women who have obesity. You also have a higher risk if you took estrogen-only hormone replacement therapy (menopausal hormone therapy) for many years. Tests to find uterine cancer include a pelvic exam, imaging tests, and a biopsy. The most common treatment is a hysterectomy , which is surgery to remove the uterus. Sometimes the surgery also removes the ovaries and fallopian tubes. Other treatments include hormone therapy, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Some women get more than one type of treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Vaginal cancer is a rare type of cancer. It is more common in women 60 and older. You are also more likely to get it if you have had a human papillomavirus ( HPV ) infection or if your mother took diethylstilbestrol (DES) when she was pregnant. Doctors prescribed DES in the 1950's to prevent miscarriages. You are also at higher risk if you have had abnormal cells in the vagina, cervix, or uterus. It often doesn't have early symptoms. However, see your doctor if you notice: Bleeding that is not your period A vaginal lump Pelvic pain A Pap test can find abnormal cells that may be cancer. Vaginal cancer can often be cured in its early stages. Treatment might include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Vulvar cancer is a rare type of cancer. It forms in a woman's external genitals, called the vulva. The cancer usually grows slowly over several years. First, precancerous cells grow on vulvar skin. This is called vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), or dysplasia. Not all VIN cases turn into cancer, but it is best to treat it early. Often, vulvar cancer doesn't cause symptoms at first. However, see your doctor for testing if you notice: A lump in the vulva Vulvar itching or tenderness Bleeding that is not your period Changes in the vulvar skin, such as color changes or growths that look like a wart or ulcer You are at greater risk if you've had a human papillomavirus (HPV) infection or have a history of genital warts. Your health care provider diagnoses vulvar cancer with a physical exam and a biopsy. Treatment varies, depending on your overall health and how advanced the cancer is. It might include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or biologic therapy. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Wilms tumor is a rare type of kidney cancer. It causes a tumor on one or both kidneys. It usually affects children, but can happen in adults. Having certain genetic conditions or birth defects can increase the risk of getting it. Children that are at risk should be screened for Wilms tumor every three months until they turn eight. Symptoms include a lump in the abdomen, blood in the urine, and a fever for no reason. Tests that examine the kidney and blood are used to find the tumor. Doctors usually diagnose and remove the tumor in surgery. Other treatments include chemotherapy and radiation and biologic therapies. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A1C is a blood test for type 2 diabetes and prediabetes . It measures your average blood glucose, or blood sugar , level over the past 3 months. Doctors may use the A1C alone or in combination with other diabetes tests to make a diagnosis. They also use the A1C to see how well you are managing your diabetes. This test is different from the blood sugar checks that people with diabetes do every day. Your A1C test result is given in percentages. The higher the percentage, the higher your blood sugar levels have been: A normal A1C level is below 5.7% Prediabetes is between 5.7 to 6.4%. Having prediabetes is a risk factor for getting type 2 diabetes. People with prediabetes may need retests every year. Type 2 diabetes is above 6.5% If you have diabetes, you should have the A1C test at least twice a year. The A1C goal for many people with diabetes is below 7. It may be different for you. Ask what your goal should be. If your A1C result is too high, you may need to change your diabetes care plan. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is blood glucose? Blood glucose, or blood sugar, is the main sugar found in your blood. It is your body's primary source of energy. It comes from the food you eat. Your body breaks down most of that food into glucose and releases it into your bloodstream. When your blood glucose goes up, it signals your pancreas to release insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose levels are too high. When you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin, can't use it as well as it should, or both. Too much glucose stays in your blood and doesn't reach your cells. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious health problems (diabetes complications). So if you have diabetes, it's important to keep your blood glucose levels within your target range.What are blood glucose targets? If you have diabetes, your blood glucose target is the range you try to reach as much as possible. The typical targets are: Before a meal: 80 to 130 mg/dL Two hours after the start of a meal: Less than 180 mg/dL Your blood glucose targets may be different, depending on your age, any additional health problems you have, and other factors. Talk with your health care team  about the best target range for you. When and how should I check my blood glucose? If you have diabetes, you'll likely need to check your blood glucose every day to make sure that your blood glucose numbers are in your target range. Some people may need to check their blood glucose several times a day. Ask your health care team how often you need to check it. The most common way to check your blood glucose level at home is with a blood glucose meter. A blood glucose meter measures the amount of glucose in a small sample of blood, usually from your fingertip. Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) is another way to check your glucose levels. Most CGM systems use a tiny sensor that is inserted under your skin. The sensor measures your glucose level every few minutes. It can show changes in your glucose level throughout the day and night. A CGM system is especially useful for people who take insulin and have problems with low blood glucose. Your provider will also check your blood glucose with a blood test called an A1C .  It checks your average blood glucose level over the past three months. People with diabetes usually have an A1C test at least twice a year. But you may need the test more often if you aren't meeting your diabetes treatment goals. What happens if my blood glucose level becomes too high? High blood glucose is called hyperglycemia . Symptoms that your blood glucose levels may be too high include: Feeling thirsty Feeling tired or weak Headaches Urinating (peeing) often Blurred vision If you often have high blood glucose levels or symptoms of high blood glucose, talk with your health care team. You may need a change in your diabetes meal plan , physical activity plan, or diabetes medicines . High blood glucose may also be caused by other conditions that can affect insulin or glucose levels in your blood. These conditions include problems with your pancreas or adrenal glands . What happens if my blood glucose level becomes low for me? Hypoglycemia , also called low blood glucose, happens when your blood glucose level drops below what is healthy for you. For many people with diabetes, this means a blood glucose reading lower than 70 mg/dL. Your number might be different, so check with your health care team to find out what blood glucose level is low for you. Symptoms of low blood glucose tend to come on quickly. The symptoms can be different for everyone, but they may include: Shaking Sweating Nervousness or anxiety Irritability or confusion Dizziness Hunger Low blood glucose levels can be common in people with type 1 diabetes and people with type 2 diabetes who take certain diabetes medicines. If you think you may have low blood glucose, check your level, even if you don't have symptoms. Low blood glucose can be dangerous and should be treated as soon as possible. Although it's rare, you can still get low blood glucose without having diabetes. The causes can include conditions such as liver disease , kidney disease , and hormone deficiencies (lack of certain hormones). Some medicines, such as certain heart medicines and antibiotics , can also cause it. See your provider to find out the cause of your low blood glucose and how to treat it. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy.  With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin.  With type 2 diabetes , the more common type, your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. You can also have prediabetes .  This means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes.  Having prediabetes puts you at a higher risk of getting type 2 diabetes. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious problems .    It can damage your eyes , kidneys , and nerves . Diabetes can also cause heart disease , stroke and even the need to remove a limb. Pregnant women can also get diabetes, called gestational diabetes . Blood tests can show if you have diabetes. One type of test, the A1C , can also check on how you are managing your diabetes. Exercise, weight control and sticking to your meal plan can help control your diabetes. You should also monitor your blood glucose level and take medicine if prescribed. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. When you are pregnant , high blood sugar levels are not good for your baby. About seven out of every 100 pregnant women in the United States get gestational diabetes. Gestational diabetes is diabetes that happens for the first time when a woman is pregnant. Most of the time, it goes away after you have your baby. But it does increase your risk for developing type 2 diabetes later on. Your child is also at risk for obesity and type 2 diabetes. Most women get a test to check for diabetes during their second trimester of pregnancy. Women at higher risk may get a test earlier. If you already have diabetes, the best time to control your blood sugar is before you get pregnant. High blood sugar levels can be harmful to your baby during the first weeks of pregnancy - even before you know you are pregnant. To keep you and your baby healthy, it is important to keep your blood sugar as close to normal as possible before and during pregnancy. Either type of diabetes during pregnancy increases the chances of problems for you and your baby. To help lower the chances talk to your health care team about: A meal plan for your pregnancy A safe exercise plan How often to test your blood sugar Taking your medicine as prescribed. Your medicine plan may need to change during pregnancy. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? If you have diabetes , your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from the foods you eat. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. What health problems can diabetes cause? Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause complications, including: Eye disease , due to changes in fluid levels, swelling in the tissues, and damage to the blood vessels in the eyes Foot problems , caused by damage to the nerves and reduced blood flow to your feet Gum disease and other dental problems, because a high amount of blood sugar in your saliva helps harmful bacteria grow in your mouth. The bacteria combine with food to form a soft, sticky film called plaque. Plaque also comes from eating foods that contain sugars or starches. Some types of plaque cause gum disease and bad breath . Other types cause tooth decay and cavities. Heart disease and stroke , caused by damage to your blood vessels and the nerves that control your heart and blood vessels Kidney disease , due to damage to the blood vessels in your kidneys. Many people with diabetes develop high blood pressure . That can also damage your kidneys. Nerve problems (diabetic neuropathy), caused by damage to the nerves and the small blood vessels that nourish your nerves with oxygen and nutrients Sexual and bladder problems, caused by damage to the nerves and reduced blood flow in the genitals and bladder Skin conditions , some of which are caused by changes in the small blood vessels and reduced circulation. People with diabetes are also more likely to have infections, including skin infections . What other problems can people with diabetes have? If you have diabetes, you need to watch out for blood sugar levels that are very high (hyperglycemia) or very low (hypoglycemia). These can happen quickly and can become dangerous. Some of the causes include having another illness or infection and certain medicines. They can also happen if you don't get the right amount of diabetes medicines . To try to prevent these problems, make sure to take your diabetes medicines correctly, follow your diabetic diet , and check your blood sugar regularly. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Until recently, the common type of diabetes in children and teens was type 1 . It was called juvenile diabetes. With Type 1 diabetes, the pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps glucose,or sugar, get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much sugar stays in the blood. Now younger people are also getting type 2 diabetes .  Type 2 diabetes used to be called adult-onset diabetes. But now it is becoming more common in children and teens, due to more obesity . With Type 2 diabetes, the body does not make or use insulin well. Children have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes if they  are overweight or have obesity, have a family history of diabetes, or are not active. Children who are African American, Hispanic, Native American/Alaska Native, Asian American, or Pacific Islander also have a higher risk. To lower the risk of type 2 diabetes in children: Have them maintain a healthy weight Be sure they are physically active Have them eat smaller portions of healthy foods Limit time with the TV, computer, and video Children and teens with type 1 diabetes may need to take insulin. Type 2 diabetes may be  controlled with diet and exercise . If not, patients will need to take oral diabetes medicines or insulin. A blood test called the A1C can check on how you are managing your diabetes.

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from the foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin. With type 2 diabetes ,your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose can't get into your cells as quickly as usual. The glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. What are the treatments for diabetes? Treatments for diabetes can depend on the type. Common treatments include a diabetic meal plan , regular physical activity, and medicines. Some less common treatments are weight loss surgery for either type and an artificial pancreas or pancreatic islet transplantation for some people with type 1 diabetes. Who needs diabetes medicines? People with type 1 diabetes need to take a diabetes medicine called insulin to control their blood sugar. Some people with type 2 diabetes can control their blood sugar with healthy food choices and physical activity. But for others, a diabetic meal plan and physical activity are not enough. They need to take diabetes medicines. The kind of medicine you take depends on your type of diabetes, daily schedule, medicine costs, and any other health conditions that you have. Over time, you may need to take more than one diabetes medicine. What are the types of medicines for type 1 diabetes? If you have type 1 diabetes, you must take insulin because your body no longer makes it. There are different types of insulin that start to work at different speeds, and the effects of each last a different length of time. Your health care provider will measure your blood glucose to decide on the type of insulin. You may need to use more than one type. You will also need to check your blood sugar at home.  Your provider will tell you how often. The results of your blood sugar testing can help you make decisions about food, physical activity, and medicines. You can take insulin several different ways. The most common are with a needle and syringe, an insulin pen, or an insulin pump. If you use a needle and syringe or a pen, you have to take insulin several times during the day, including with meals. An insulin pump gives you small, steady doses throughout the day. Less common ways to take insulin include inhalers, injection ports, and jet injectors. In rare cases, taking insulin alone might not be enough to manage your blood sugar. Then you would need to take another diabetes medicine. What are the types of medicines for type 2 diabetes? There are several different medicines for type 2 diabetes. Each works in a different way. Many of them are pills. There are also medicines that you inject under your skin, such as insulin. Over time, you may need more than one diabetes medicine to manage your blood sugar. You might add another diabetes medicine or switch to a combination medicine.  A combination medicine contains more than one type of diabetes medicine in the same pill. Some people with type 2 diabetes take both pills and injections. Even if you don't usually take insulin, you may need it at special times, such as during pregnancy or if you are in the hospital. What else should I know about taking medicines for diabetes? Even if you take medicines for diabetes, you still need to eat a healthy diet, stop smoking, take your other medicines, and get regular physical activity. These will help you manage your diabetes. It is important to make sure that you understand your diabetes treatment plan. Talk to your provider about: What your target blood sugar level is What to do if your blood sugar gets too low or too high Whether your diabetes medicines will affect other medicines you take If you will have any side effects from the diabetes medicines You should not change or stop your diabetes medicines on your own. Talk to your provider first. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Diabetes means your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too 
high.  With type 1 diabetes, your pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that 
helps glucose get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much glucose 
stays in your blood.  Over time, high blood glucose can lead to serious problems with your heart , eyes , kidneys , nerves , and gums and teeth. Type 1 diabetes happens most often in children and young adults but can appear at any 
age. Symptoms may include: Being very thirsty Urinating often Feeling very hungry or tired Losing weight without trying Having sores that heal slowly Having dry, itchy skin Losing the feeling in your feet or having tingling in your feet Having blurry eyesight A blood test can show if you have diabetes. If you do, you will need to take insulin for 
the rest of your life. A blood test called the A1C can check to see how well you are managing your diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is type 2 diabetes? Type 2 diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose is your main source of energy. It comes from the foods you eat. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. If you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin or doesn't use insulin well. The glucose then stays in your blood and not enough goes into your cells. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . But you can take steps to manage your diabetes and try to prevent these health problems. What causes type 2 diabetes? Type 2 diabetes may be caused by a combination of factors: Being overweight or having obesity Not being physically active Genetics and family history Type 2 diabetes usually starts with insulin resistance. This is a condition in which your cells don't respond normally to insulin. As a result, your body needs more insulin to help the glucose enter your cells. At first, your body makes more insulin to try to get cells to respond. But over time, your body can't make enough insulin, and your blood glucose levels rise. Who is at risk for type 2 diabetes? You are at higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes if you: Are over age 45. Children, teenagers , and younger adults can get type 2 diabetes, but it is more common in middle-aged and older people. Have prediabetes , which means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes Had diabetes in pregnancy or gave birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more. Have a family history of diabetes Are overweight or have obesity Are Black or African American, Hispanic/Latino, American Indian, Asian American, or Pacific Islander Are not physically active Have other conditions such as high blood pressure , heart disease , stroke , polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), or depression Have low HDL (good) cholesterol and high triglycerides Have acanthosis nigricans - dark, thick, and velvety skin around your neck or armpits What are the symptoms of type 2 diabetes? Many people with type 2 diabetes have no symptoms at all. If you do have them, the symptoms develop slowly over several years. They might be so mild that you do not notice them. The symptoms can include: Increased thirst and urination Increased hunger Feeling tired Blurred vision Numbness or tingling in the feet or hands Sores that do not heal Unexplained weight loss How is type 2 diabetes diagnosed? Your health care provider will use blood tests to diagnose type 2 diabetes. The blood tests include: A1C test , which measures your average blood sugar level over the past 3 months Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, which measures your current blood sugar level. You need to fast (not eat or drink anything except water) for at least 8 hours before the test. Random plasma glucose (RPG) test, which measures your current blood sugar level. This test is used when you have diabetes symptoms and the provider does not want to wait for you to fast before having the test. What are the treatments for type 2 diabetes? Treatment for type 2 diabetes involves managing your blood sugar levels. Many people are able to do this by living a healthy lifestyle. Some people may also need to take medicine.: A healthy lifestyle includes following a healthy eating plan and getting regular physical activity . You need to learn how to balance what you eat and drink with physical activity and diabetes medicine, if you take any. Medicines for diabetes include oral medicines, insulin, and other injectable medicines. Over time, some people will need to take more than one type of medicine to control their diabetes. You will need to check your blood sugar regularly. Your health care provider will tell you how often you need to do it. It's also important to keep your blood pressure and cholesterol levels close to the targets your provider sets for you. Make sure to get your screening tests regularly. Can type 2 diabetes be prevented? You can take steps to help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by losing weight if you are overweight, eating fewer calories, and being more physically active. If you have a condition which raises your risk for type 2 diabetes, managing that condition may lower your risk of getting type 2 diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? If you have diabetes , your blood glucose , or blood sugar, levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood glucose levels. Prediabetes means that your blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes. If you have prediabetes, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes. How do the foods I eat affect my blood glucose levels? The glucose in your blood comes from certain foods called carbohydrates , or "carbs." Foods that are high in carbs include candy and sweets, sodas, breads, tortillas, and white rice. The more carbs you eat, the higher your blood glucose level will be. Whether you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes, making the right food choices is an important way to keep your blood glucose at a level that is healthy for you. When you control your blood glucose, you lower your chance of having serious health problems from diabetes , such as vision loss and heart problems . And if you have prediabetes or are at risk for diabetes, eating foods that keep your blood glucose levels healthy may help prevent type 2 diabetes later on. What's the best diet for diabetes? There isn't a specific diet or meal plan that works for everybody. Your health care provider may have you see a registered dietician (RD) or a diabetes educator who can help design the best eating plan for you. The plan will consider: Any medicines that you take Your weight Any other health conditions you have Your lifestyle and tastes Your goals All eating plans for diabetes have a few things in common, including eating the right foods in the right amounts at the right times . What foods should I eat if I have diabetes? Eating the right foods for diabetes means eating a variety of healthy foods from all the food groups: Fruits and vegetables Whole grains, such as whole wheat, brown rice, barley, quinoa, and oats Proteins , such as lean meats, chicken, turkey, fish, eggs, nuts, beans, lentils, and tofu Nonfat or low-fat dairy, such as milk, yogurt, and cheese What foods should I limit to control my blood glucose? To keep your blood glucose under control, you may need to cut back on certain foods and drinks. This doesn't mean that you can never enjoy them. But you will need to have them less often or in smaller amounts. High-carb foods and drinks, such as: Sugary foods, such as candy, cookies, cake, ice cream, sweetened cereals, and canned fruits with added sugar Drinks with added sugars, such as juice, regular soda, and regular sports or energy drinks White rice, tortillas, breads and pasta - especially those made with white flour Starchy vegetables, such as white potatoes, corn, and peas Fried foods and other foods high in saturated trans fats . Foods high in sodium (salt). Alcohol. If you do drink, you should drink moderately. This means no more than one standard drink a day if you're a woman or two standard drinks a day if you're a man. What else do I need to know about diabetic diets? If you have diabetes, it's important to eat the right amount of food every day. Your eating plan will include how much to eat, so that you get the right amount of carbs in each meal or snack. You'll learn how to count carbs and measure your food. Eating at the right times is also important. You will want to plan for regular, balanced meals to avoid blood glucose levels that are too high or too low for you. Eating about the same amount of carbs at each meal can be helpful. Your eating plan will also teach you how to stick with your plan at home and when you eat out. Eating healthy to control your blood glucose does take some effort. But the reward is a chance to live your healthiest life with diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. What eye problems can diabetes cause? Over time, high blood sugar may damage the blood vessels and lenses in your eyes. This can lead to serious diabetic eye problems which can harm your vision and sometimes cause blindness . Some common diabetes eye problems include: Diabetic retinopathy , which is the leading cause of blindness in American adults. It affects blood vessels in the retina (the light-sensitive layer of tissue in the back of your eye). The blood vessels may swell and leak fluid into your eye. If it's not treated, it can cause serious problems such as vision loss and retinal detachment , where the retina is pulled away from its normal position at the back of your eye. Diabetic macular edema (DME) , which happens when blood vessels in the retina leak fluid into the macula (a part of the retina needed for sharp, central vision). This usually develops in people who already have other signs of diabetic retinopathy. Glaucoma , a group of eye diseases that can damage the optic nerve (the bundle of nerves that connects the eye to the brain). Glaucoma from diabetes happens when the blood vessels in the front of your eye are damaged, and new blood vessels grow near the iris (the colored part of your eye). The blood vessels block the space where fluid drains from your eye. This causes fluid to build up and pressure to increase inside your eye. Cataract , which happen when the clear lens in the front of your eye becomes cloudy. Cataracts are common as people age. But people with diabetes are more likely to develop cataracts younger and faster than people without diabetes. Researchers think that high glucose levels cause deposits to build up in the lenses of your eyes. Who is more likely to develop diabetic eye problems? Anyone with diabetes can develop diabetic eye disease. But your risk of developing it is higher if you: Have had diabetes for a long time Don't have good control over your high blood sugar or high blood pressure Are pregnant Have high blood cholesterol Smoke tobacco What are the symptoms of diabetic eye problems? In the early stages, diabetic eye problems usually don't have any symptoms. That's why regular dilated eye exams are so important, even if you think your eyes are healthy. You should also watch for sudden changes in your vision that could mean an emergency. Call your doctor right away if you notice any of these symptoms: Many new spots or dark wavy strings floating in your vision (floaters) Flashes of light A dark shadow over part of your vision, like a curtain Vision loss Eye pain or redness Talk with your doctor if you have these symptoms, even if they come and go: Spots or dark wavy strings floating in your vision Blurry or wavy vision Vision that changes a lot Trouble seeing colors How are diabetic eye problems diagnosed? Eye doctors do dilated eye exams to diagnose eye problems. A dilated eye exam uses eye drops to open your pupils wide so your doctor can look for signs of eye problems and treat them before they harm your vision. Your doctor will also test your vision and measure the pressure in your eyes. What are the treatments for diabetic eye problems? Treatment for diabetic eye problems depends on the problem and how serious it is. Some of the treatments include: Lasers to stop blood vessels from leaking Injections (shots) in the eye to stop new, leaky blood vessels from growing Surgery to remove blood and scar tissue or replace a cloudy lens Eye drops to lower fluid pressure in the eye But these treatments aren't cures. Eye problems can come back. That's why your best defense against serious vision loss is to take control of your diabetes and get regular eye exams. It's also important to keep your blood pressure and cholesterol in a healthy range. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose can't get into your cells as quickly as usual. The glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. How does diabetes cause foot problems? Foot problems are common in people with diabetes. They can happen over time when high blood sugar damages the nerves and blood vessels in the feet. The nerve damage, called diabetic neuropathy , can cause numbness, tingling, pain, or a loss of feeling in your feet. If you can't feel pain, you may not know when you have a cut, blister , or ulcer (open sore) on your foot. A wound like that could get infected. The infection may not heal well because the damaged blood vessels can cause poor blood flow in your feet. Having an infection and poor blood flow can lead to gangrene . That means the muscle, skin, and other tissues start to die. If you have gangrene or a foot ulcer that does not get better with treatment, you may need an amputation . This is a surgery to cut off your damaged toe, foot, or part of your leg. It may prevent a bad infection from spreading and could save your life. But there's a lot you can do to prevent a foot wound from becoming a major health problem. How can I protect my feet if I have diabetes? The best way to protect your feet is by controlling your blood sugar levels every day. This will help keep nerve and blood vessel damage from getting worse. The next step is to keep the skin of your feet healthy. Good foot care for people with diabetes includes: Checking your feet every day. Look for cuts, redness, and other changes in the skin and toenails, including warts or other spots that your shoes could rub. Make sure to check the bottoms of your feet too. Washing your feet every day. Use warm water and soap. Don't soak your feet because that can dry out your skin. After you dry your feet, you can use talcum powder or cornstarch between your toes. They soak up moisture that can cause infection. If you use lotion, don't apply it between your toes. Asking your doctor how to remove corns and calluses safely. Thick skin on your feet can rub and lead to sores. But removing it the wrong way could damage your skin. So you don't want to cut the skin or use medicated pads or liquid removers. Trimming your toenails straight across with a clipper. If it's hard for you to trim your own toenails, or if they're thick or curve into the skin, have a podiatrist (foot doctor) do it for you. Always wearing well-fitting shoes and socks or slippers to protect your feet when walking. You don't want to walk barefoot, even indoors. And be sure your shoes are smooth inside. A seam or pebble could rub your skin raw. Protecting your feet from heat and cold. Use sunscreen on exposed skin and don't walk barefoot at the beach. In cold weather, wear warm socks instead of warming your feet near a heater or fireplace. Keeping the blood flowing in your feet. Put your feet up when you're sitting. Wiggle your toes and circle your feet throughout the day. Don't wear tight socks. And get plenty of activity that's not too hard on the feet, such as walking. Getting your feet checked at your health care visits. Even if you haven't noticed a problem, it's good to have your health care provider look at your feet. When should I see my health care provider about diabetic foot problems? Serious foot problems can develop quickly. See your health care provider right away if you notice: A cut, blister, or bruise on your feet that doesn't start to heal in a few days Red, warm, or painful skin on your feet A callus with dried blood inside A foot infection that becomes black and smells bad that could be gangrene Remember, controlling your blood sugar and caring for your feet every day are the best steps you can take to prevent serious diabetic foot problems. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. What is diabetic heart disease? Diabetic heart disease is a term for heart disease in people who have diabetes. If you have diabetes, you are much more likely to develop heart disease or have a stroke than people who don't have diabetes. And you may start having these problems at a younger age. Over time, the effects of high blood sugar from diabetes can include damage to the blood vessels and nerves in your heart. This damage increases your chance of developing heart diseases, including: Coronary artery disease (CAD) . It happens slowly as a sticky material called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. Heart failure . With this condition, your heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet the needs of your body. Cardiomyopathy . This is a group of diseases in which the heart muscle may become thick or stiff. Who is more likely to develop diabetic heart disease? Diabetes puts you at serious risk for heart disease. It also makes you more likely to develop other conditions that raise your risk even more, including: High blood pressure High blood levels of LDL "bad" cholesterol High triglycerides (a type of fat in your blood) with low blood levels of HDL "good" cholesterol Your risk for heart disease is also higher if you Are male Smoke Have obesity Have too much belly fat around your waist, even though you're at a healthy weight: For men, that's a waist more than 40 inches For women, that's a waist more than 35 inches Have a family history of heart disease Have chronic kidney disease What are the symptoms of diabetic heart disease? In the early stages, heart disease usually doesn't have any symptoms. But if your heart disease worsens, you can have symptoms. Your symptoms will depend on the type of heart disease you have. They might include: Shortness of breath Fatigue Dizziness or fainting Arrhythmia (problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat) Swollen feet and ankles Chest pain It's important to know that people with diabetes may not feel chest pain. That's because diabetes can damage the nerves in your heart. If you have any symptoms that could be heart disease, talk with your health care provider. How is diabetic heart disease diagnosed? To find out if you have diabetic heart disease, your provider will: Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms and other health conditions you may have Ask about your family history , to find out if you have relatives who have or had heart disease Do a physical exam Likely run some tests to help understand your personal risk for heart disease , including: Blood tests to check your cholesterol , triglycerides , and blood sugar levels A blood-pressure check Heart tests , if needed Depending on your risk level, your provider may send you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for care. If you do have heart disease, treatment will depend on the type of heart disease you have. How can I prevent diabetic heart disease? You may be able to prevent heart disease or keep it from getting worse by working with your provider to: Control your blood sugar levels Manage other conditions you may have that can raise your risk for heart disease Take any medicines your provider prescribed Make heart-healthy habits part of your daily life Follow a healthy eating plan for diabetes NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

If you have diabetes , your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Over time, this can damage your kidneys. Your kidneys clean your blood. If they are damaged, waste and fluids build up in your blood instead of leaving your body. Kidney damage from diabetes is called diabetic nephropathy. It begins long before you have symptoms. People with diabetes should get regular screenings for kidney disease. Tests include a urine test to detect protein in your urine and a blood test to show how well your kidneys are working. If the damage continues, your kidneys could fail. In fact, diabetes is the most common cause of kidney failure in the United States. People with kidney failure need either dialysis or a kidney transplant . You can slow down kidney damage or keep it from getting worse. Controlling your blood sugar and blood pressure, taking your medicines and not eating too much protein can help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

If you have diabetes , your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Over time, this can damage the covering on your nerves or the blood vessels that bring oxygen to your nerves. Damaged nerves may stop sending messages, or may send messages slowly or at the wrong times. This damage is called diabetic neuropathy.  Over half of people with diabetes get it.  Symptoms may include: Numbness in your hands, legs, or feet Shooting pains, burning, or tingling Nausea, vomiting, constipation, or diarrhea Problems with sexual function Urinary problems Dizziness when you change positions quickly Your doctor will diagnose diabetic neuropathy with a physical exam and nerve tests. Controlling your blood sugar can help prevent nerve problems, or keep them from getting worse. Treatment may include pain relief and other medicines. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is type 2 diabetes? If you have diabetes, your blood sugar levels are too high. With type 2 diabetes , this happens because your body does not make enough insulin, or it does not use insulin well (this is called insulin resistance). If you are at risk for type 2 diabetes, you might be able to prevent or delay developing it. Who is at risk for type 2 diabetes? Many Americans are at risk for type 2 diabetes. Your chances of getting it depend on a combination of risk factors such as your genes and lifestyle. The risk factors include: Having prediabetes , which means you have blood sugar levels that are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes Being overweight or having obesity Being age 45 or older A family history of diabetes Being African American, Alaska Native, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander Having high blood pressure Having a low level of HDL (good) cholesterol or a high level of triglycerides A history of diabetes in pregnancy Having given birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more An inactive lifestyle A history of heart disease or stroke Having depression Having polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Having acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition in which your skin becomes dark and thick, especially around your neck or armpits Smoking How can I prevent or delay getting type 2 diabetes? If you are at risk for diabetes, you may be able to prevent or delay getting it. Most of the things that you need to do involve having a healthier lifestyle. So if you make these changes, you will get other health benefits as well. You may lower your risk of other diseases, and you will probably feel better and have more energy. The changes are: Losing weight and keeping it off. Weight control is an important part of diabetes prevention. You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 10% of your current weight. For example, if you weigh 200 pounds, your goal would be to lose between 10 to 20 pounds. And once you lose the weight, it is important that you don't gain it back. Following a healthy eating plan. It is important to reduce the amount of calories you eat and drink each day, so you can lose weight and keep it off. To do that, your diet should include smaller portions and less fat and sugar. You should also eat a variety of foods from each food group, including plenty of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. It's also a good idea to limit red meat, and avoid processed meats. Get regular exercise. Exercise has many health benefits , including helping you to lose weight and lower your blood sugar levels. These both lower your risk of type 2 diabetes. Try to get at least 30 minutes of physical activity 5 days a week. If you have not been active, talk with your health care professional to figure out which types of exercise are best for you. You can start slowly and work up to your goal. Don't smoke. Smoking can contribute to insulin resistance, which can lead to type 2 diabetes. If you already smoke, try to quit . Talk to your health care provider to see whether there is anything else you can do to delay or to prevent type 2 diabetes. If you are at high risk, your provider may suggest that you take one of a few types of diabetes medicines . NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is blood glucose? Blood glucose , or blood sugar, is the main sugar found in your blood. It is your body's primary source of energy. It comes from the food you eat. Your body breaks down most of that food into glucose and releases it into your bloodstream. When your blood glucose goes up, it signals your pancreas to release insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. For people with diabetes , your body doesn't make enough insulin, can't use it as well as it should, or both. Too much glucose stays in your blood and doesn't reach your cells. What is hyperglycemia? Hyperglycemia means high blood glucose. It most often affects people who have diabetes. When you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin or can't use it the right way. Too much glucose stays in your blood and doesn't reach your cells. What causes hyperglycemia? A key part of managing diabetes is controlling your blood glucose levels. To do this, you need to follow a diabetes meal plan and get regular physical activity . You might also need to take diabetes medicines. You have to balance all of these to keep your blood glucose at the right levels. But if you eat too much food or the wrong foods, don't take your medicines correctly, or don't get physical activity, you can get hyperglycemia. It can also happen if you are stressed or sick. Less commonly, people who don't have diabetes can also get hyperglycemia. It can be caused by conditions that can affect insulin or glucose levels in your blood. They include problems with your pancreas or adrenal glands , certain medicines, and severe illnesses. What are the symptoms of hyperglycemia? The symptoms of hyperglycemia include: Feeling thirsty Feeling tired or weak Headaches Urinating (peeing) often Blurred vision If you are diabetic and you often have high blood glucose levels or the symptoms of hyperglycemia, talk with your health care team. You may need a change in your diabetes meal plan, physical activity plan, or diabetes medicines. If you don't have diabetes and you are having these symptoms, see your provider to find out the cause and how to treat it. What other problems can hyperglycemia cause? If hyperglycemia is not treated, it can cause other problems. In people with diabetes, long-term hyperglycemia can lead to serious health problems (diabetes complications). If your blood glucose levels get very high, you can develop diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA). It happens when your body doesn't have enough insulin to allow blood glucose into your cells for use as energy. Instead, your liver breaks down fat for fuel. This process produces acids called ketones. When too many ketones are produced too fast, they can build up to dangerous levels in your body. This can be life-threatening. The symptoms of DKA may include: Trouble breathing Nausea or vomiting Pain in your abdomen (belly) Confusion Feeling very tired or sleepy If you have an an at-home test for ketones, check your ketone level every 4 to 6 hours when your blood glucose is very high or when you are having these symptoms. If the test shows that your ketones are moderate or high, or if you don't have a ketones test, contact your health care provider right away or get emergency medical help. How is hyperglycemia diagnosed? If you have diabetes, you'll most likely need to check your blood glucose every day and make sure that it's not too high. You can do this with a blood glucose meter or continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) system. There are also blood tests that providers can use to check if your blood glucose is too high. What are the treatments for hyperglycemia? If you have diabetes and often have high blood glucose, your health care team may make changes to your diabetes meal plan, physical activity plan, and/or diabetes medicines. If you have severe hyperglycemia and are having symptoms of DKA, you will need treatment at the hospital. The treatment often includes I.V. (intravenous) fluids and insulin. Can hyperglycemia be prevented? If you have diabetes, managing your diabetes can help prevent hyperglycemia. To manage your diabetes, it's important to: Follow your diabetes meal plan Get regular physical activity If you need diabetes medicines, take them correctly Regularly check your blood glucose level Get regular checkups with your health care team

What is metabolic syndrome? Metabolic syndrome is the name for a group of risk factors for heart disease , diabetes , and other health problems. You can have just one risk factor, but people often have several of them together. When you have at least three of them, it is called metabolic syndrome. These risk factors include: A large waistline, also called abdominal obesity or "having an apple shape." Too much fat around the stomach is a greater risk factor for heart disease than too much fat in other parts of the body. Having a high triglyceride level. Triglycerides are a type of fat found in the blood. Having a low HDL cholesterol level . HDL is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol because it helps remove cholesterol from your arteries. Having high blood pressure . If your blood pressure stays high over time, it can damage your heart and lead to other health problems. Having a high fasting blood sugar . Mildly high blood sugar may be an early sign of diabetes. The more factors you have, the higher your risk for heart disease, diabetes, and stroke is. What causes metabolic syndrome? Metabolic syndrome has several causes that act together: Overweight and obesity An inactive lifestyle Insulin resistance, a condition in which the body can't use insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone that helps move blood sugar into your cells to give them energy. Insulin resistance can lead to high blood sugar levels. Age - your risk goes up as get older Genetics - ethnicity and family history People who have metabolic syndrome often also have excessive blood clotting and inflammation throughout the body. Researchers don't know whether these conditions cause metabolic syndrome or worsen it. Who is at risk for metabolic syndrome? The most important risk factors for metabolic syndrome are: Abdominal obesity (a large waistline) An inactive lifestyle Insulin resistance There are certain groups of people who have an increased risk of metabolic syndrome: Some racial and ethnic groups. Mexican Americans have the highest rate of metabolic syndrome, followed by whites and blacks. People who have diabetes People who have a sibling or parent who has diabetes Women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) People who take medicines that cause weight gain or changes in blood pressure, blood cholesterol, and blood sugar levels What are the symptoms of metabolic syndrome? Most of the metabolic risk factors have no obvious signs or symptoms, except for a large waistline. How is metabolic syndrome diagnosed? Your health care provider will diagnose metabolic syndrome based on the results of a physical exam and blood tests. You must have at least three of the risk factors to be diagnosed with metabolic syndrome: A large waistline , which means a waist measurement of 35 inches or more for women 40 inches or more for men A high triglyceride level , which is 150 mg/dL or higher A low HDL cholesterol level , which is Less than 50 mg/dL for women Less than 40 mg/dL for men High blood pressure , which is a reading of 130/85 mmHg or higher. A high fasting blood sugar , which is 100 mg/dL or higher What are the treatments for metabolic syndrome? The most important treatment for metabolic syndrome is a heart-healthy lifestyle, which includes: A heart-healthy eating plan, which limits the amount of saturated and trans fats that you eat. It encourages you to choose a variety of nutritious foods, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean meats. Aiming for a healthy weight Managing stress Getting regular physical activity Quitting smoking (or not starting if you don't already smoke) If making lifestyle changes is not enough, you may need to take medicines. For example, you may need medicines to lower cholesterol or blood pressure. Can metabolic syndrome be prevented? The best way to prevent metabolic syndrome is through the heart-healthy lifestyle changes. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is prediabetes? Prediabetes means that your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes . Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Too much glucose in your blood can damage your body over time. If you have prediabetes, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke . But if you make some lifestyle changes now, you may be able to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes. What causes prediabetes? Prediabetes usually happens when your body has a problem with insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. A problem with insulin could be: Insulin resistance, a condition in which the body can't use its insulin properly. It makes it hard for your cells to get glucose from your blood. This can cause your blood sugar levels to rise. Your body can't make enough insulin to keep your blood sugar levels at a healthy level Researchers think that being overweight and not getting regular physical activity are major factors in causing prediabetes. Who is at risk for prediabetes? About 1 out of every 3 adults has prediabetes. It is more common in people who: Are overweight or have obesity Are age 45 or older Have a parent, brother, or sister with diabetes Are African American, Alaska Native, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander American Are not physically active Have health conditions such as high blood pressure and high cholesterol Have had gestational diabetes (diabetes in pregnancy) Have a history of heart disease or stroke Have metabolic syndrome Have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) What are the symptoms of prediabetes? Most people don't know they have prediabetes because usually there are no symptoms. Some people with prediabetes may have darkened skin in the armpit or on the back and sides of the neck. They may also have many small skin growths in those same areas. How is prediabetes diagnosed? There are a few different blood tests that can diagnose prediabetes. The most common ones are: Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, which measures your blood sugar at a single point in time. You need to fast (not eat or drink) for at least 8 hours before the test. The results of the test are given in mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter): A normal level is 99 or below Prediabetes is 100 to 125 Type 2 diabetes is 126 and above A1C test , which measures your average blood sugar over the past 3 months. The results of an A1C test are given as a percentage. The higher the percentage, the higher your blood sugar levels have been. A normal level is below 5.7% Prediabetes is between 5.7 to 6.4% Type 2 diabetes is above 6.5% If I have prediabetes, will I get diabetes? If you have prediabetes, you may be able to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes through lifestyle changes: Losing weight , if you are overweight Getting regular physical activity Following a healthy, reduced-calorie eating plan In some cases, your health care provider may also recommend taking diabetes medicines . Can prediabetes be prevented? If you are at risk for prediabetes, those same lifestyle changes (losing weight, regular physical activity, and a healthy eating plan) may prevent you from getting it. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT deficiency)? Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT deficiency, or AATD) is an inherited condition that raises your risk for lung and liver disease. If you have this condition, your body doesn't make enough alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT). AAT is made by your liver. It helps protect your lungs from inflammation and irritating substances you might breathe in, such as smoke. If your liver doesn't make enough AAT, your lungs may be more easily damaged from smoking , pollution , or dust from the environment. This can lead to a serious lung condition called chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ). AAT deficiency may also cause a liver disease called cirrhosis . This is more common in children who have AAT deficiency. What causes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT deficiency)? AAT deficiency is a genetic disorder . That means it's caused by changes in your genes, which may also be called gene variants or mutations. Your genes carry information that controls what you look like and how your body works. AAT deficiency is caused by changes in the SERPINA1 gene , which carries instructions for making the AAT protein. These gene changes are inherited from your parents, so AAT deficiency tends to run in families: If you have two mutated copies of the gene, it means you have a condition called AAT deficiency. People with this disorder have a higher risk of getting lung disease or liver damage before the age of 45. If you have one mutated copy of the gene, you are a carrier of AAT deficiency. In these cases, this means you are at slightly higher risk of developing lung disease, especially if you have other risk factors, such as being a smoker. You could still pass the mutated gene on to your children. There are a few gene changes that cause AAT deficiency. These gene changes can: Decrease the amount of AAT protein your liver makes. Prevent your liver from making any AAT. Affect the shape of the AAT protein so that it can't move out of your liver to protect your lungs. Over time, AAT builds up in your liver and causes damage. What are the symptoms of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT deficiency)? Some people who have AAT deficiency do not have any symptoms. For those who do, symptoms usually appear in people between 20 and 50 years old. These symptoms may include: Wheezing Shortness of breath , especially after exercise Chronic cough with phlegm (mucus) Repeated respiratory infections such as colds and the flu Chest pain Fatigue Faster-than-normal heartbeat when you stand up Vision problems Losing weight without trying Some people who have AAT deficiency may have liver damage. Signs of liver damage include jaundice (a condition that causes your skin and eyes to turn yellow) and swelling in your legs. Rarely, AAT deficiency can cause skin problems, such as painful lumps or patches. How is alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT deficiency) diagnosed? Your health care provider may test you for AAT deficiency if you have: Symptoms of AAT deficiency A condition that could be related to AAT deficiency Relatives who have AAT deficiency Relatives who have a lung or liver disease that could be related to AAT deficiency AAT deficiency in babies often affects the liver. Your baby may need AAT testing if he or she has signs of liver disease such as jaundice or abnormal liver enzyme tests . A blood test can check the level of AAT protein in your blood. If the level is lower than normal, it is likely that you have AAT deficiency. A genetic test is the most certain way to check for AAT deficiency and should be done to confirm the results of the blood test. There are two types of genetic tests: A genotype test looks for the more common types of gene changes that can cause AAT deficiency. A phenotype test checks for changes in the AAT protein that change how it would normally work. If your lungs are affected, you may also have lung function tests to see how well your lungs are working. What are the treatments for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AAT deficiency)? There is no cure for AAT deficiency, but there are treatments to help with the symptoms and slow the lung damage it causes. Treatment options may include: Inhaled medicines to help you breathe better. Pulmonary rehabilitation . Oxygen therapy . Augmentation therapy, which is a lifelong treatment. It raises the levels of the AAT protein in your lungs, using ATT protein taken from the blood of donors. It helps slow down lung damage. It cannot prevent liver damage. Lung surgery or a lung transplant , if your lungs are severely damaged. Liver transplant , if your liver is severely damaged. To help prevent or delay lung damage, it is important to quit smoking (if you smoke) and avoid secondhand smoke , dust, and air pollution. Ask your provider If you need to stop drinking alcohol.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare, inherited disease. It affects the nervous system, immune system, and other body systems.  Symptoms appear in young children, usually before age 5. They include: Ataxia - trouble coordinating movements Poor balance Slurred speech Tiny, red spider veins, called telangiectasias, on the skin and eyes Lung infections Delayed physical and sexual development People with A-T have an increased risk of developing diabetes and cancers, especially lymphoma and leukemia. Although it affects the brain, people with A-T usually have normal or high intelligence. A-T has no cure. Treatments might improve some symptoms. They include injections to strengthen the immune system, physical and speech therapy, and high-dose vitamins. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What are birth defects? A birth defect is a problem that happens while a baby is developing in the mother's body.  Most birth defects happen during the first 3 months of pregnancy. One out of every 33 babies in the United States is born with a birth defect. A birth defect may affect how the body looks, works, or both. Some birth defects like cleft lip or neural tube defects are structural problems that can be easy to see. Others, like heart disease , are found using special tests. Birth defects can range from mild to severe. How a birth defect affects a child's life depends mostly on which organ or body part is involved and how severe the defect is. What causes birth defects? For some birth defects, researchers know the cause. But for many birth defects, the exact cause is unknown. Researchers think that most birth defects are caused by a complex mix of factors, which can include: Genetics. One or more genes might have a change or mutation that prevents them from working properly. For example, this happens in Fragile X syndrome . With some defects, a gene or part of the gene might be missing. Chromosomal problems. In some cases, a chromosome or part of a chromosome might be missing. This is what happens in Turner syndrome . In other cases, such as with Down syndrome , the child has an extra chromosome. Exposures to medicines , chemicals, or other toxic substances . For example, alcohol misuse can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorders . Infections during pregnancy . For example, infection with Zika virus during pregnancy can cause a serious defect in the brain . Lack of certain nutrients. Not getting enough folic acid before and during pregnancy is a key factor in causing neural tube defects. Who is at risk of having a baby with birth defects? Certain factors may increase the chances of having a baby with a birth defect, such as: Smoking, drinking alcohol, or taking certain "street" drugs during pregnancy Having certain medical conditions, such as obesity or uncontrolled diabetes , before and during pregnancy Taking certain medicines Having someone in your family with a birth defect. To learn more about your risk of having a baby with a birth defect, you can talk with a genetic counselor , Being an older mother, typically over the age of 34 years How are birth defects diagnosed? Health care providers can diagnose some birth defects during pregnancy, using prenatal testing .  That's why it important to get regular prenatal care . Other birth defects may not be found until after the baby is born. Providers may find them through newborn screening . Some defects, such as club foot, are obvious right away. Other times, the health care provider may not discover a defect until later in life, when the child has symptoms. What are the treatments for birth defects? Children with birth defects often need special care and treatments. Because the symptoms and problems caused by birth defects vary, the treatments also vary. Possible treatments may include surgery, medicines, assistive devices , physical therapy, and speech therapy. Often, children with birth defects need a variety of services and may need to see several specialists. The primary health care provider can coordinate the special care that the child needs. Can birth defects be prevented? Not all birth defects can be prevented. But there are things you can do before and during pregnancy to increase your chance of having a healthy baby: Start prenatal care as soon as you think you might be pregnant, and see your health care provider regularly during pregnancy Get 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid every day. If possible, you should start taking it at least one month before you get pregnant. Don't drink alcohol, smoke, or use "street" drugs Talk to your health care provider about any medicines you are taking or thinking about taking. This includes prescription and over-the-counter medicines, as well as dietary or herbal supplements. Learn how to prevent infections during pregnancy If you have any medical conditions, try to get them under control before you get pregnant Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Most brain malformations begin long before a baby is born. Something damages the developing nervous system or causes it to develop abnormally. Sometimes it's a genetic problem. In other cases, exposure to certain medicines , infections , or radiation during pregnancy interferes with brain development. Parts of the brain may be missing, abnormally small or large, or not fully developed. Treatment depends upon the problem. In many cases, treatment only helps with symptoms. It may include antiseizure medicines, shunts to drain fluid from the brain, and physical therapy. There are head malformations that do not involve the brain. Craniofacial disorders are the result of abnormal growth of soft tissue and bones in the face and head. It's common for new babies to have slightly uneven heads, but parents should watch the shape of their baby's head for possible problems. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is cerebral palsy (CP)? Cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of disorders that cause problems with movement , balance , and posture. CP affects the cerebral motor cortex. This is the part of the brain that directs muscle movement. In fact, the first part of the name, cerebral, means having to do with the brain. The second part, palsy, means weakness or problems with using the muscles. What are the types of cerebral palsy (CP)? There are different types of CP: Spastic cerebral palsy , which is the most common type. It causes increased muscle tone, stiff muscles, and awkward movements. Sometimes it only affects one part of the body. In other cases, it can affect both arms and legs, the trunk, and the face. Dyskinetic cerebral palsy , which causes problems controlling the movement of the hands, arms, feet, and legs. This can make it hard to sit and walk. Ataxic cerebral palsy , which causes problems with balance and coordination. Mixed cerebral palsy , which means that you have symptoms of more than one type. What causes cerebral palsy (CP)? CP is caused by abnormal development or damage to the developing brain. It could happen when: The cerebral motor cortex doesn't develop normally during fetal growth There is an injury to the brain before, during, or after birth Both the brain damage and the disabilities it causes are permanent. Who is at risk for cerebral palsy (CP)? CP is more common among boys than girls. It affects black children more often than white children. Certain medical conditions or events that can happen during pregnancy and delivery that may increase a baby's risk of being born with cerebral palsy, including: Being born too small Being born too early Being born a twin or other multiple birth Being conceived by in vitro fertilization (IVF) or other assisted reproductive technology (ART) An infection in the pregnant parent Health problems in the pregnant parent, such as thyroid problems Severe jaundice Having complications during birth Rh incompatibility Seizures Exposure to toxins What are the signs of cerebral palsy (CP)? There are many different types and levels of disability with CP. So the signs can be different in each child. The signs usually appear in the early months of life. But sometimes there is a delay in getting a diagnosis until after age two. Infants with CP often have developmental delays. They are slow to reach developmental milestones such as learning to roll over, sit, crawl, or walk. They may also have abnormal muscle tone. They may seem floppy, or they may be stiff or rigid. It's important to know that children without CP can also have these signs. Contact your child's health care provider know if your child has any of these signs, so you can get a correct diagnosis. How is cerebral palsy (CP) diagnosed? Diagnosing CP involves several steps: Developmental monitoring (or surveillance) means tracking a child's growth and development over time. If there are any concerns about your child's development, then he or she should have a developmental screening test as soon as possible. Developmental screening involves a giving your child a short test to check for motor, movement, or other developmental delays. If the screenings are not normal, the provider will recommend some evaluations. Developmental and medical evaluations are done to diagnose which disorder your child has. The provider many use many tools to make the diagnosis: A check of your child's motor skills, muscle tone, reflexes, and posture. A medical history. Lab tests, genetic tests , and/or imaging tests . What are the treatments for cerebral palsy (CP)? There is no cure for CP, but treatment can improve the lives of those who have it. It is important to begin a treatment program as early as possible. A team of health professionals will work with you and your child to develop a treatment plan. Common treatments include: Medicines Surgery Assistive devices Physical, occupational, recreational, and speech therapy Can cerebral palsy (CP) be prevented? You cannot prevent the genetic problems that can cause CP. But it may be possible to manage or avoid some of the risk factors for CP. For example, making sure that pregnant women have been vaccinated could prevent certain infections that can cause CP in unborn babies. Using cars seats for infants and toddlers could prevent head injuries , which can be a cause of CP. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a group of genetic nerve disorders. It is named after the three doctors who first identified it. In the United States, CMT affects about 1 in 2,500 people. CMT affects your peripheral nerves . Peripheral nerves carry movement and sensation signals between the brain and spinal cord and the rest of the body. Symptoms usually start around the teen years. Foot problems such as high arches or hammertoes can be early symptoms. As CMT progresses, your lower legs may weaken. Later, your hands may also become weak. Doctors diagnose CMT by doing a neurologic exam, nerve tests, genetic tests, or a nerve biopsy. There is no cure. The disease can be so mild you don't realize you have it or severe enough to make you weak. Physical therapy, occupational therapy, braces and other devices and sometimes surgery can help. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Chiari malformations (CMs) are structural defects in the cerebellum. The cerebellum is the part of the brain that controls balance.  With CM, brain tissue extends into the spinal canal.  It can happen when part of the skull is too small, which pushes the brain tissue down. There are several types of CM. One type often happens in children who have neural tube defects . Some types cause no symptoms and don't need treatment. If you have symptoms, they may include: Neck pain Balance problems Numbness or other abnormal feelings in the arms or legs Dizziness Vision problems Difficulty swallowing Poor hand coordination Doctors diagnose CM using imaging tests. Medicines may ease some symptoms, such as pain. Surgery is the only treatment available to correct or stop the progression of nerve damage. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Cleft lip and cleft palate are birth defects that occur when a baby's lip or mouth do not form properly.  They happen early during pregnancy. A baby can have a cleft lip, a cleft palate, or both. A cleft lip happens if the tissue that makes up the lip does not join completely before birth. This causes an opening in the upper lip. The opening can be a small slit or a large opening that goes through the lip into the nose. It can be on one or both sides of the lip or, rarely, in the middle of the lip. Children with a cleft lip also can have a cleft palate. The roof of the mouth is called the "palate." With a cleft palate, the tissue that makes up the roof of the mouth does not join correctly.  Babies may have both the front and back parts of the palate open, or they may have only one part open. Children with a cleft lip or a cleft palate often have problems with feeding and talking. They also might have ear infections, hearing loss, and problems with their teeth. Often, surgery can close the lip and palate. Cleft lip surgery is usually done before age 12 months, and cleft palate surgery is done before 18 months. Many children have other complications. They may need additional surgeries, dental and orthodontic care, and speech therapy as they get older. With treatment, most children with clefts do well and lead a healthy life. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Cloning describes the processes used to create an exact genetic replica of another cell, tissue or organism. The copied material, which has the same genetic makeup as the original, is referred to as a clone.  The most famous clone was a Scottish sheep named Dolly. There are three different types of cloning: Gene cloning, which creates copies of genes or segments of DNA Reproductive cloning, which creates copies of whole animals Therapeutic cloning, which creates embryonic stem cells .  Researchers hope to use these cells to grow healthy tissue to replace injured or diseased tissues in the human body. NIH: National Human Genome Research Institute

Most of us see our world in color. We enjoy looking at a lush green lawn or a red rose in full bloom. If you have a color vision defect, you may see these colors differently than most people. There are three main kinds of color vision defects. Red-green color vision defects are the most common. This type occurs in men more than in women. The other major types are blue-yellow color vision defects and a complete absence of color vision. Most of the time, color blindness is genetic. There is no treatment, but most people adjust and the condition doesn't limit their activities.

What are congenital heart defects? Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are problems with the structure of the heart. "Congenital" means that that the problems are present at birth. These defects happen when a baby's heart doesn't develop normally during pregnancy. Congenital heart defects are the most common type of birth defect . Congenital heart defects can change the way the heart pumps blood. They may make blood flow too slowly, go the wrong way, or block it completely. There are many types of congenital heart defects. They can happen in one or more parts of the heart. The most common types are: Septal defects ("hole in the heart") - openings in the wall between the left and right sides of the heart Heart valve defects - problems with the valves that control the flow of blood through the heart Defects in the large blood vessels that carry blood in and out of the heart Congenital heart defects can range from very mild problems that never need treatment to life-threatening problems at birth. The most serious congenital heart defects are called critical congenital heart disease . Babies with these defects usually need surgery in the first year of life. But the symptoms of milder heart defects may not show up until childhood or adulthood. What causes congenital heart defects? Researchers often don't know what causes congenital heart defects. They do know that changes in a baby's genes sometimes cause a heart defect. The changed genes may come from the parents, or the changes may happen during pregnancy. Who is more likely to have a baby with a congenital heart defect? Several things may increase the chance that your baby has a congenital heart defect, such as: Your health before and during pregnancy , including: Having diabetes before pregnancy or developing it in the first 3 months of pregnancy (diabetes that develops later in pregnancy isn't a major risk for heart defects). Carefully controlling your blood sugar before and during pregnancy can lower your baby's risk of congenital heart defects. Having phenylketonuria (PKU) , a rare inherited disorder that affects how the body uses a protein in foods. If you have PKU, eating a low-protein diet before getting pregnant can lower your baby's risk of having a congenital heart defect. Having rubella (German measles) during pregnancy. Your contact with certain substances during pregnancy , including: Smoking or secondhand smoke (breathing smoke from another smoker). Certain medicines , such as angiotensin-converting (ACE) inhibitors for high blood pressure and retinoic acids for acne. If you're pregnant or plan to get pregnant, talk with your health care provider about all the medicines you take. Your family history and genetics. In most cases, congenital heart defects don't run in families. But your chance of having a baby with a congenital heart defect does go up if you or the other parent has a congenital heart defect, or if you already have a child with a congenital heart defect. What are the symptoms of congenital heart defects? Congenital heart defects don't cause pain. The signs and symptoms are different, depending on the type and number of defects and how serious they are. Common signs and symptoms of congenital heart defects include: Cyanosis - a bluish color to the skin, lips, and fingernails. It happens when there isn't enough oxygen in the blood. Fatigue - your baby may be unusually sleepy and may become very tired during feedings. Poor blood flow. Fast or difficult breathing. Heart murmur - an unusual sound between heartbeats. What other problems do congenital heart defects cause? Congenital heart defects don't always cause other problems. If they do, which problems you have would depend on the type and number of defects and how serious the defects are. Children with congenital heart defects are more likely to: Be smaller than other children Have problems or delays in mental, and emotional growth, and behavior, such as: Speech and language problems Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) People with congenital heart defects may develop other health conditions, including: Endocarditis - an infection of lining of the heart and valves Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to the body Pulmonary hypertension - high blood pressure in your lungs Kidney and liver disease How are congenital heart defects diagnosed? Before a baby is born , your provider may use ultrasound pictures of the baby's heart to look for heart defects. This is called a fetal echocardiogram. It's done between weeks 18 and 22 of pregnancy. During the first few days after birth , all newborns are checked for congenital heart defects. A pulse oximeter is clipped to your baby's hands or feet to measure blood oxygen. If it shows low levels of blood oxygen, more tests will be needed to find out if your baby has a heart defect. To diagnose congenital heart defects in babies, children, and adults , a provider may use many tools, including: A physical exam. Certain heart tests to see how the heart is working. Genetic testing to see if certain gene problems caused the defect. What are the treatments for congenital heart defects? Treatment depends on the type of congenital heart defect and how serious it is. Possible treatments include: Cardiac catheterization to repair simple defects, such as a small hole in the inside wall of the heart. A catheterization uses a thin tube guided through a vein and into the heart. Heart surgery may be needed to: Repair defects in the heart and blood vessels. Repair or replace a heart valve. Place a device in the chest to help the heart pump blood. Do a heart transplant . Medicine is often used if your baby has a specific type of congenital heart defect called patent ductus arteriosus. All children and adults who have congenital heart defects need regular follow-up care from a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) throughout their life, even if their defect was repaired. Some people may need several heart surgeries or catheterizations over the years. They may also need to take medicines to help their hearts work as well as possible. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Craniofacial is a medical term that relates to the bones of the skull and face. Craniofacial abnormalities are birth defects of the face or head. Some, like cleft lip and palate , are among the most common of all birth defects. Others are very rare. Most of them affect how a person's face or head looks. These conditions may also affect other parts of the body. Treatment depends on the type of problem. Plastic and reconstructive surgery may help the person's appearance.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disease of the mucus and sweat glands. It affects mostly your lungs, pancreas, liver, intestines, sinuses, and sex organs.  CF causes your mucus to be thick and sticky. The mucus clogs the lungs, causing breathing problems and making it easy for bacteria to grow. This can lead to repeated lung infections and lung damage. The symptoms and severity of CF can vary. Some people have serious problems from birth. Others have a milder version of the disease that doesn't show up until they are teens or young adults. Sometimes you will have few symptoms, but later you may have more symptoms. CF is diagnosed through various tests, such as gene, blood, and sweat tests. There is no cure for CF, but treatments have improved greatly in recent years. In the past, most deaths from CF were in children and teenagers. Today, with improved treatments, some people who have CF are living into their forties, fifties, or older. Treatments may include chest physical therapy, nutritional and respiratory therapies , medicines, and exercise. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is Down syndrome? Down syndrome is a condition in which a person has an extra chromosome or an extra piece of a chromosome. This extra copy changes how a baby's body and brain develop. It can cause both mental and physical challenges during their lifetime. Even though people with Down syndrome might act and look similar, each person has different abilities. What causes Down syndrome? Chromosomes are tiny "packages" in your cells that contain your genes. Genes carry information, called DNA, that controls what you look like and how your body works. People with Down syndrome have an extra copy of chromosome 21.  In some cases, they may have an extra copy of part of the chromosome. Having an extra copy of a chromosome is called trisomy. So sometimes Down syndrome is also called trisomy 21. Down syndrome is usually not inherited. It happens by chance, as an error when cells are dividing during early development of the fetus . It is not known for sure why Down syndrome occurs or how many different factors play a role. One factor that increases the risk of having a baby with Down syndrome is the age of the mother. Women ages 35 and older are more likely to have a baby with Down syndrome. What are the symptoms of Down syndrome? The symptoms of Down syndrome are different in each person. And people with Down syndrome may have different problems at different times of their lives. They usually have mild to moderate intellectual disabilities. Their development is often delayed . For example, they may start talking later than other children. Some of the common physical signs of Down syndrome include: A flat face Eyes that slant up A short neck Small hands and feet Poor muscle tone Loose joints What other problems does Down syndrome cause? Many people with Down syndrome have the common physical signs and have healthy lives. But some people with Down syndrome might have one or more birth defects or other health problems. Some of the more common ones include: Hearing loss Sleep apnea (a disorder that causes you to repeatedly stop breathing during sleep) Ear infections Eye diseases Congenital heart defects (heart defects that are present at birth) Digestive problems Problems with the upper part of the spine Obesity How is Down syndrome diagnosed? Health care providers can check for Down syndrome during pregnancy or after a child is born. There are two basic types of tests that help find Down syndrome during pregnancy : Prenatal screening tests can show whether your unborn baby has a higher or lower chance of having Down syndrome. If a screening test shows that your baby could have Down syndrome, you'll need another test to find out for sure. Prenatal diagnostic tests can diagnose or rule out Down syndrome by checking the chromosomes in a sample of cells. These tests have a small risk of causing a miscarriage, so they're often done after a screening test shows that an unborn baby could have Down syndrome. After a baby is born, the provider may make an initial diagnosis of Down syndrome based on the physical signs of the syndrome. The provider can use a karyotype genetic test to confirm the diagnosis. The test can check for extra chromosomes in a sample of the baby's blood. What are the treatments for Down syndrome? There is no single, standard treatment for Down syndrome. Treatments are based on each person's physical and intellectual needs, strengths, and limitations. Services early in life focus on helping children with Down syndrome develop to their full potential. These services include speech, occupational, and physical therapies. They are typically offered through early intervention programs in each state. Children with Down syndrome may also need extra help or attention in school, although many children are included in regular classes. Since people with Down syndrome can have birth defects and other health problems, they will need regular medical care. They may need to have certain extra health screenings to check for problems that happen more often in people with Down syndrome. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

People with dwarfism have short stature. This means that their height is under 4' 10" as an adult. They are usually of normal intelligence. Dwarfism most often does happen in families where both parents are of average height. More than 300 different conditions can cause dwarfism. Achondroplasia is the most common type of dwarfism. Achondroplasia is a genetic condition that affects about 1 in 15,000 to 1 in 40,000 people. It makes your arms and legs short in comparison to your head and trunk. You may also have a larger head and weak muscle tone. Other genetic conditions, kidney disease, and problems with metabolism or hormones can also cause dwarfism. The conditions that cause dwarfism can also cause other health problems. Most of them are treatable. It is important to have regular checkups throughout your life.  With proper medical care, most people with dwarfism have active lives and live as long as other people.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of inherited disorders that weaken connective tissues . Connective tissues are proteins that support skin, bones, blood vessels, and other organs. EDS usually affects your skin, joints and blood vessel walls. Symptoms include: Loose joints Fragile, small blood vessels Abnormal scar formation and wound healing Soft, velvety, stretchy skin that bruises easily There are several types of EDS. They can range from mild to life-threatening. About 1 in 5,000 people has EDS. There is no cure. Treatment involves managing symptoms, often with medicines and physical therapy. It also includes learning how to protect your joints and prevent injuries.

Your family history includes health information about you and your close relatives. Families have many factors in common, including their genes, environment, and lifestyle. Looking at these factors can help you figure out whether you have a higher risk for certain health problems, such as heart disease, stroke, and cancer. Having a family member with a disease raises your risk, but it does not mean that you will definitely get it. Knowing that you are at risk gives you a chance to reduce that risk by following a healthier lifestyle and getting tested as needed. You can get started by talking to your relatives about their health. Draw a family tree and add the health information. Having copies of medical records and death certificates is also helpful. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Alcohol can harm your baby at any stage during a pregnancy. That includes the earliest stages, before you even know you are pregnant. Drinking during pregnancy can cause a group of conditions called fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). Children who are born with FASD can have a mix of problems, such as medical, behavioral, educational, and social problems. The kinds of problems they have depend on which type of FASD they have. The problems could include : Abnormal facial features, such as a smooth ridge between the nose and upper lip Small head size Shorter-than-average height Low body weight Poor coordination Hyperactive behavior Difficulty with attention and memory Learning disabilities and difficulty in school Speech and language delays Intellectual disability or low IQ Poor reasoning and judgment skills Sleep and sucking problems as a baby Vision or hearing problems Problems with the heart, kidneys, or bones Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is the most serious type of FASD. People with fetal alcohol syndrome have facial abnormalities, including wide-set and narrow eyes, growth problems and nervous system abnormalities. Diagnosing FASD can be hard because there is no medical test, like a blood test, for it. The health care provider will make a diagnosis by looking at the child's signs and symptoms and asking whether the mother drank alcohol during pregnancy. FASDs last a lifetime. There is no cure for FASDs, but treatments can help. These include medicines to help with some symptoms, medical care for health problems, behavior and education therapy, and parent training. A good treatment plan is specific to the child's problems. It should include close monitoring, follow-ups, and changes when needed. Certain "protective factors" can help reduce the effects of FASDs and help people who have them reach their full potential. They include: Diagnosis before 6 years of age Loving, nurturing, and stable home environment during the school years Absence of violence around them Involvement in special education and social services There is no known safe amount of alcohol during pregnancy. To prevent FASDs, you should not drink alcohol while you are pregnant, or when you might get pregnant. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited developmental disability . A problem with a specific gene causes the disease. Normally, the gene makes a protein you need for brain development.  But the problem causes a person to make little or none of the protein. This causes the symptoms of Fragile X. People with only a small change in the gene might not show any signs of Fragile X. People with bigger changes can have severe symptoms. These might include: Intelligence problems, ranging from learning disabilities to severe intellectual disabilities Social and emotional problems, such as aggression in boys or shyness in girls Speech and language problems, especially in boys A genetic blood test can diagnose Fragile X. There is no cure. You can treat some symptoms with educational, behavioral, or physical therapy, and with medicines. Getting treatment early can help. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Friedreich ataxia is an inherited disease that damages your nervous system. The damage affects your spinal cord and the nerves that control muscle movement in your arms and legs.  Symptoms usually begin between the ages of 5 and 15. The main symptom is ataxia, which means trouble coordinating movements. Specific symptoms include: Difficulty walking Muscle weakness Speech problems Involuntary eye movements Scoliosis (curving of the spine to one side) Heart palpitations, from the heart disease which can happen along with Friedreich ataxia People with Friedreich ataxia usually need a wheelchair 15 to 20 years after symptoms first appear. In severe cases, people become incapacitated. There is no cure. You can treat symptoms with medicines, braces, surgery, and physical therapy. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a genetic disorder that is most common in males. About 1 in 10 African American males in the United States has it. G6PD deficiency mainly affects red blood cells , which carry oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body.  The most common medical problem it can cause is hemolytic anemia . That happens when red blood cells are destroyed faster than the body can replace them. If you have G6PD deficiency, you may not have symptoms. Symptoms happen if your red blood cells are exposed to certain chemicals in food or medicine, certain bacterial or viral infections, or stress. They may include: Paleness Jaundice Dark urine Fatigue Shortness of breath Enlarged spleen Rapid heart rate A blood test can tell if you have it. Treatments include medicines to treat infection, avoiding substances that cause the problem with red blood cells, and sometimes transfusions. NIH: National Library of Medicine

Gaucher disease is a rare, inherited disorder. It is a type of lipid metabolism disorder . If you have it, you do not have enough of an enzyme called glucocerebrosidase.  This causes too much of a fatty substance to build up in your spleen, liver, lungs, bones and, sometimes, your brain. This prevents these organs from working properly. There are three types: Type 1, the most common form, causes liver and spleen enlargement, bone pain and fractures (broken bones), and, sometimes, lung and kidney problems. It does not affect the brain. It can occur at any age. Type 2, which causes severe brain damage, appears in infants. Most children who have it die by age 2. In type 3, there may be liver and spleen enlargement. The brain is gradually affected. It usually starts in childhood or adolescence. Gaucher disease has no cure. Treatment options for types 1 and 3 include medicine and enzyme replacement therapy, which is usually very effective. There is no good treatment for the brain damage of types 2 and 3. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Genes are the building blocks of inheritance. Passed from parent to child, they contain 

instructions for making proteins. If genes don't produce the right proteins or don't produce them 

correctly, a child can have a genetic disorder . Gene therapy is an experimental technique that uses genes to treat or prevent disease. 

The most common form of gene therapy involves inserting a normal gene to replace an 

abnormal gene. Other approaches include: Swapping an abnormal gene for a normal one Repairing an abnormal gene Altering the degree to which a gene is turned on or off Although there is much hope for gene therapy, it is still experimental.

A genetic brain disorder is caused by a variation or a mutation in a gene.  A variation is a different form of a gene. A mutation is a change in a gene. Genetic brain disorders affect the development and function of the brain. Some genetic brain disorders are due to random gene mutations or mutations caused by environmental exposure, such as cigarette smoke. Other disorders are inherited, which means that a mutated gene or group of genes is passed down through a family. They can also be due to a combination of both genetic changes and other outside factors. Some examples of genetic brain disorders include: Leukodystrophies Phenylketonuria Tay-Sachs disease Wilson disease Many people with genetic brain disorders fail to produce enough of certain proteins that influence brain development and function. These brain disorders can cause serious problems that affect the nervous system. Some have treatments to control symptoms.  Some are life-threatening.

Genetic counseling provides information and support to people who have, or may be at risk for, genetic disorders . A genetic counselor meets with you to discuss genetic risks. The counseling may be for yourself or a family member. Or you may get it when you are planning or expecting a baby. You may follow up with genetic testing . There are many reasons to seek genetic counseling. You may consider it if you : Have a personal or family history of a genetic condition or birth defect Are pregnant or planning to be pregnant after age 35 Already have a child with a genetic disorder or birth defect Have had two or more pregnancy losses or a baby who died Have had ultrasound or screening tests that suggest a possible problem

Genes are the building blocks of heredity. They are passed from parent to child. They hold DNA, the instructions for making proteins. Proteins do most of the work in cells. They move molecules from one place to another, build structures, break down toxins, and do many other maintenance jobs. Sometimes there is a mutation, a change in a gene or genes.  The mutation changes the gene's instructions for making a protein, so the protein does not work properly or is missing entirely. This can cause a medical condition called a genetic disorder. You can inherit a gene mutation from one or both parents.  A mutation can also happen during your lifetime. There are three types of genetic disorders: Single-gene disorders, where a mutation affects one gene.  Sickle cell anemia is an example. Chromosomal disorders, where chromosomes (or parts of chromosomes) are missing or changed. Chromosomes are the structures that hold our genes.  Down syndrome is a chromosomal disorder. Complex disorders, where there are mutations in two or more genes. Often your lifestyle and environment also play a role.  Colon cancer is an example. Genetic tests on blood and other tissue can identify genetic disorders. NIH: National Library of Medicine

What is genetic testing? Genetic testing is a type of medical test that looks for changes in your DNA. DNA is short for deoxyribonucleic acid. It contains the genetic instructions in all living things. Genetic tests analyze your cells or tissue to look for any changes in: Genes , which are parts of DNA that carry the information needed to make a protein Chromosomes , which are thread-like structures in your cells. They contain DNA and proteins. Proteins , which do most of the work in your cells.  Testing can look for changes in the amount and activity level of proteins. If it finds changes, it might be due to changes in your DNA. Why is genetic testing done? Genetic testing may be done for many different reasons, including to: Find genetic diseases in unborn babies. This is one type of prenatal testing . Screen newborn babies for certain treatable conditions Lower the risk of genetic diseases in embryos that were created using assisted reproductive technology Find out if you carry a gene for a certain disease that could be passed on to your children. This is called carrier testing. See whether you are at increased risk of developing a specific disease. This may be done for a disease that runs in your family. Diagnose certain diseases Identify genetic changes that may be causing or contributing to a disease that you were already diagnosed with Figure out how severe a disease is Help guide your doctor in deciding the best medicine and dosage for you. This is called pharmacogenomic testing . How is genetic testing done? Genetic tests are often done on a blood or cheek swab sample. But they may also be done on samples of hair, saliva, skin, amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds a fetus during pregnancy), or other tissue. The sample is sent to a laboratory. There, a lab technician will use one of several different techniques to look for genetic changes. What are the benefits of genetic testing? The benefits of genetic testing include: Helping doctors make recommendations for treatment or monitoring Giving you more information for making decisions about your health and your family's health: If you find out that you are at risk for a certain disease, you might take steps to lower that risk. For example, you may find out that you should be screened for a disease earlier and more often. Or you might decide to make healthy lifestyle changes . If you find out that you are not at risk for a certain disease, then you can skip unnecessary checkups or screenings A test could give you information that helps you make decisions about having children Identifying genetic disorders early in life so treatment can be started as soon as possible What are the drawbacks of genetic testing? The physical risks of the different types of genetic testing are small. But there can be emotional, social, or financial drawbacks: Depending on the results, you may feel angry, depressed, anxious, or guilty. This can be especially true if you are diagnosed with a disease that does not have effective treatments. You may be worried about genetic discrimination in employment or insurance Genetic testing may give you limited information about a genetic disease. For example, it cannot tell you whether you will have symptoms, how severe a disease might be, or whether a disease will get worse over time. Some genetic tests are expensive, and health insurance might only cover part of the cost. Or they may not cover it at all. How do I decide whether to be tested? The decision about whether to have genetic testing is complex. In addition to discussing the test with your health care provider, you can meet with a genetic counselor . Genetic counselors have specialized degrees and experience in genetics and counseling. They can help you understand the tests and weigh the risks and benefits. If you do get a test, they can explain the results and make sure that you have the support that you need.

Hemochromatosis is a disease in which too much iron builds up in your body. Your body needs iron but too much of it is toxic. If you have hemochromatosis, you absorb more iron than you need. Your body has no natural way to get rid of the extra iron. It stores it in body tissues, especially the liver, heart, and pancreas. The extra iron can damage your organs. Without treatment, it can cause your organs to fail. There are two types of hemochromatosis. Primary hemochromatosis is an inherited disease. Secondary hemochromatosis is usually the result of something else, such as anemia, thalassemia, liver disease, or blood transfusions. Many symptoms of hemochromatosis are similar to those of other diseases. Not everyone has symptoms. If you do, you may have joint pain, fatigue, general weakness, weight loss, and stomach pain. Your doctor will diagnose hemochromatosis based on your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and the results from tests and procedures. Treatments include removing blood (and iron) from your body, medicines, and changes in your diet. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is hemophilia? Hemophilia is a rare bleeding disorder in which the blood does not clot properly. This can lead to problems with bleeding too much after an injury or surgery. You can also have sudden bleeding inside your body, such as in your joints, muscles, and organs. Your blood contains many proteins called clotting factors that can help form clots to stop bleeding. People with hemophilia have low levels of one of these factors, usually either factor VIII (8) or factor IX (9). How severe the hemophilia is depends on the amount of factor in the blood. The lower the amount of the factor, the more likely it is that bleeding could happen and might lead to serious health problems. What are the types of hemophilia? There are several different types of hemophilia. The most common are: Hemophilia A (classic hemophilia), which is caused by a lack or decrease of clotting factor VIII (8) Hemophilia B (Christmas disease), which is caused by a lack or decrease of clotting factor IX (9) What causes hemophilia? Most types of hemophilia are inherited. They are caused by change in one of the genes (also called a mutation) that provides instructions for making the clotting factor proteins. The change may mean that the clotting proteins don't work properly or that they are missing altogether. These genes are on the X chromosome. You may have one or two X chromosomes: People who are born male have one X chromosome (from the mother) and one Y chromosome (from the father). They can get hemophilia if their one X chromosome has the gene change. People who are born female have two X chromosomes, one from the father and one from the mother. They usually only get hemophilia if: Both X chromosomes have the gene change OR One X chromosome has the gene change and the other X chromosome is missing or inactive. People who are born female who have the gene change on one X chromosome are a "carrier" of hemophilia. Sometimes they may have some symptoms of hemophilia. They can pass the gene change on to their children. Hemophilia that is not inherited is called acquired hemophilia. It is rare. It happens when your body makes specialized proteins called autoantibodies that attack and disable a clotting factor. This can happen because of pregnancy, immune system disorders , cancer, or allergic reactions to certain medicines. Sometimes the cause is unknown. Who is at risk for hemophilia? Hemophilia is much more common in people who were born male since they can get it with a change to the gene on one X chromosome. People who have a family history of hemophilia are also at higher risk. What are the symptoms of hemophilia? The signs and symptoms of hemophilia are: Bleeding into the joints. This can cause swelling and pain or tightness in the joints. It often affects the knees, elbows, and ankles. Bleeding into the skin (which is bruising ). Bleeding into the muscle and soft tissue, which can cause a build-up of blood in the area (called a hematoma). Bleeding of the mouth and gums, including bleeding that is hard to stop after you lose a tooth. Bleeding after circumcision . Bleeding after having shots, such as vaccinations . Bleeding in the head of an infant after a difficult delivery. Blood in the urine or stool. Frequent and hard-to-stop nosebleeds. In some cases, severe hemophilia may cause bleeding in the brain. This may cause brain damage and can be life-threatening. How is hemophilia diagnosed? To find out if you have hemophilia, your health care provider will: Ask about your medical history, including your symptoms and other health conditions you may have. Ask about your family history, to find out if you have relatives who have or had hemophilia. Do a physical exam to look for signs of hemophilia, such as bruising. Do certain blood tests to show if your blood is clotting properly. If it does not, then you will have clotting factor tests to diagnose the cause of the bleeding disorder. These blood tests would show the type of hemophilia and the severity. There is genetic testing for the factor VIII (8) and factor IX (9) genes. This testing may be used in people who have a family history of hemophilia to: Identify people who are carriers before they make decisions about pregnancy Test a fetus for hemophilia during pregnancy Test a newborn for hemophilia What are the treatments for hemophilia? The best way to treat hemophilia is to replace the missing clotting factor so that your blood can clot properly. This is usually done by injecting replacement clotting factor into a vein. The replacement clotting factor may be made from donated human blood. Or it may be made in a lab; this kind is called a recombinant clotting factor. Replacement clotting factor can help treat a bleeding episode. In more severe cases of hemophilia, you might get the factor on a regular basis to prevent bleeding. You can learn how to inject the factor so that you can do it yourself at home. There are other medicines to treat hemophilia. They may work by releasing factor VIII (8) from where it is stored in the body tissues, replacing the function of factor VIII (8), or preventing clots from breaking down. If bleeding has damaged your joints, physical therapy may help them function better. Good quality medical care from healthcare professionals who know a lot about the disorder can help prevent some serious problems. Often the best choice for care is to visit a hemophilia treatment center (HTC) . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited disease that causes certain nerve cells in the brain to waste away. People are born with the defective gene, but symptoms usually don't appear until middle age. Early symptoms of HD may include uncontrolled movements, clumsiness, and balance problems. Later, HD can take away the ability to walk, talk, and swallow. Some people stop recognizing family members. Others are aware of their environment and are able to express emotions. If one of your parents has Huntington's disease, you have a 50% chance of getting it. A blood test can tell you if have the HD gene and will develop the disease. Genetic counseling can help you weigh the risks and benefits of taking the test. There is no cure.  Medicines can help manage some of the symptoms, but cannot slow down or stop the disease. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Hydrocephalus is the buildup of too much cerebrospinal fluid in the brain. Normally, this fluid cushions your brain. When you have too much, though, it puts harmful pressure on your brain. Hydrocephalus can be congenital, or present at birth. Causes include genetic problems and problems with how the fetus develops. An unusually large head is the main sign of congenital hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus can also happen after birth. This is called acquired hydrocephalus. It can occur at any age. Causes can include head injuries, strokes, infections, tumors, and bleeding in the brain. Symptoms include: Headache Vomiting and nausea Blurry vision Balance problems Bladder control problems Thinking and memory problems Hydrocephalus can permanently damage the brain, causing problems with physical and mental development. If untreated, it is usually fatal. With treatment, many people lead normal lives with few limitations. Treatment usually involves surgery to insert a shunt. A shunt is a flexible but sturdy plastic tube. The shunt moves the cerebrospinal fluid to another area of the body where it can be absorbed. Medicine and rehabilitation therapy can also help. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is a genetic condition that happens when a male is born with an extra copy of the X chromosome. KS can affect different stages of physical, language, and social development. It also usually causes infertility . What causes Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? KS is not inherited. It's caused by a random error that happens when a sperm or egg is formed. This error causes a male to be born with an extra X chromosome. Chromosomes are tiny "packages" in your cells that contain your genes. Genes carry information, called DNA, that controls what you look like and how your body works. Normally, you're born with a set of 46 chromosomes in each cell, two of which are the sex chromosomes. Females usually have two X chromosomes (XX), and males usually have one X and one Y (XY). In KS, the male usually has two X chromosomes and one Y (XXY). In rare cases, a male could have XY in some cells and XXY in other cells. This is called mosaic Klinefelter syndrome. Males with mosaic Klinefelter syndrome may have fewer symptoms, depending on the number of XY cells they have in their bodies and where those cells are located. What are the symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? Some males with KS may have no symptoms or very mild symptoms. So they might not know that they have KS, or they might not get diagnosed with it right away. In other cases, the symptoms can be more severe. Boys with KS may be taller than other boys their age, with more fat around the belly. After puberty, they may have: Smaller testes and penis Breast growth (called gynecomastia) Less facial and body hair Reduced muscle tone Narrower shoulders and wider hips Weaker bones Decreased sexual interest Lower energy Many of these symptoms happen because of low testosterone in the body. Testosterone is the main male sex hormone . Boys with KS may also have learning or language problems. These problems may affect them socially, so they may be shy and quiet and can have trouble fitting in. Most males with KS are infertile because they make little or no sperm. How is Klinefelter syndrome (KS) diagnosed? A genetic test called a karyotype test can diagnose KS. This test can show if there are abnormal chromosomes, including if there is an extra X chromosome. What are the treatments for Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? There is no cure for KS, but treatments are available. The sooner the treatment is started, the better.  If treatment is started by early puberty, it will likely help in reducing the symptoms. Treatments for KS may include: Testosterone replacement therapy Surgery to remove or reduce breasts Physical, speech, behavioral, and occupational therapy In some cases, fertility treatments may help men with KS father children. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are leukodystrophies? Leukodystrophies are a group of rare genetic disorders that affect the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS is made up of your brain and spinal cord.  Leukodystrophies damage the white matter of your CNS. The white matter includes: Nerve fibers, also called axons, which connect your nerve cells Myelin, a layer of proteins and fatty materials that covers and protects the nerve fibers. It also helps speed up signals between the nerve cells. When the white matter is damaged, it can slow down or block the signals between nerve cells. This can cause many different symptoms, including trouble with movement , vision , hearing , and thinking. There are over 50 types of leukodystrophies. Some types are present at birth, while others may not cause symptoms until a child becomes a toddler. A few types mainly affect adults. Most types get worse over time. What causes leukodystrophies? Leukodystrophies are caused by genetic changes. These changes are usually inherited, meaning that they are passed from parent to child. What are the symptoms of leukodystrophies? The symptoms of leukodystrophies depend on the type; they can include a gradual loss of: Muscle tone balance and mobility Walking Speech Ability to eat Vision Hearing Behavior There can also be other symptoms, such as: Learning disabilities bladder issues Breathing problems Developmental disabilities Muscle control disorders Seizures How are leukodystrophies diagnosed? Leukodystrophies can be hard to diagnose because there are so many different types which can have different symptoms. Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: Physical and neurological exams A medical history, including asking about family history Imaging tests , such as an MRI or CT scan Genetic testing to look for genetic changes that could cause leukodystrophies Lab tests What are the treatments for leukodystrophies? There is no cure for leukodystrophies. Treatment focuses on relieving symptoms and providing support. It may include: Medicines to manage muscle tone, seizures, and spasticity (muscle stiffness) Physical, occupational, and speech therapies to improve mobility, function, and cognitive problems Nutritional therapy for eating and swallowing problems Educational and recreational programs Stem cell or bone marrow transplantation can be helpful for a few types of leukodystrophy. One type of leukodystrophy, CTX, is treatable if it is diagnosed early. It is treated with chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) replacement therapy. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Marfan syndrome is a disorder that affects connective tissue. Connective tissues are proteins that support skin, bones, blood vessels, and other organs. One of these proteins is fibrillin. A problem with the fibrillin gene causes Marfan syndrome. Marfan syndrome can be mild to severe, and the symptoms can vary. People with Marfan syndrome are often very tall, thin, and loose jointed. Most people with Marfan syndrome have heart and blood vessel problems, such as a weakness in the aorta or heart valves that leak. They may also have problems with their bones, eyes, skin, nervous system, and lungs. There is no specific test for Marfan syndrome. Your doctor may use your medical history, family history, and a physical exam to diagnose it. Marfan syndrome has no cure, but treatments can help delay or prevent complications. Treatments include medicines, surgery, and other therapies. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Metabolism is the process your body uses to get or make energy from the food you eat. Food is made up of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Chemicals in your digestive system break the food parts down into sugars and acids, your body's fuel. Your body can use this fuel right away, or it can store the energy in your body tissues, such as your liver, muscles, and body fat. A metabolic disorder occurs when abnormal chemical reactions in your body disrupt this process. When this happens, you might have too much of some substances or too little of other ones that you need to stay healthy. There are different groups of disorders. Some affect the breakdown of amino acids , carbohydrates , or lipids . Another group, mitochondrial diseases , affects the parts of the cells that produce the energy. You can develop a metabolic disorder when some organs, such as your liver or pancreas, become diseased or do not function normally. Diabetes is an example.

What is muscular dystrophy (MD)? Muscular dystrophy (MD) is a group of more than 30 genetic diseases . They cause weakness of the muscles. Over time, the weakness gets worse and can cause trouble walking and doing daily activities. Some types of MD can also affect other organs. What are the types of muscular dystrophy (MD)? There are many different types of MD. Some of the more common types include: Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which is the most common childhood form. It is severe and affects boys more often than girls. The symptoms usually start between ages 3 and 6. Becker muscular dystrophy, which is similar to Duchenne but is less severe and gets worse more slowly. It often starts in the teenage years. Congenital muscular dystrophies, which are present at birth or before age 2. They can be mild or severe. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, which often starts in the teenage years. At first, it affects the muscles of the face, shoulders, and upper arms. Each of the types of MD can be different in many ways, such as: Who is more likely to get them Which muscles they affect When they appear, such as in infancy, childhood, middle age, or later What the symptoms are How serious the symptoms are How quickly they get worse Whether they run in families Whether they affect other organs Even within the same type of MD, people can have different symptoms. What causes muscular dystrophy (MD)? MD is genetic, meaning that it caused by a change in one or more genes. Gene changes are also called gene variants or mutations. The gene changes in MD affect proteins that strengthen and protect muscles. There are different gene changes that cause each type of MD. And sometimes people who have the same type of MD can  have different gene changes. Muscular dystrophy can run in families, or you can be the first in your family to have a muscular dystrophy. How is muscular dystrophy (MD) diagnosed? To find out if you or your child has MD, your health care provider may use: A medical and family history A physical exam Blood and urine tests, including genetic tests and tests for certain enzymes that may be released by damaged muscles Muscle biopsies Electromyography and nerve conduction studies to find out if muscles are responding the right way to nerve signals Heart testing , such as an electrocardiogram (EKG), since some types of MD can cause heart problems Exercise tests to measure muscle strength and breathing and detect any increased rates of certain chemicals following exercise Imaging tests such as an MRI to look at muscle quality and bulk and measure fatty replacement of muscle tissue What are the treatments for muscular dystrophy (MD)? There is no cure for muscular dystrophy. Treatment can help with the symptoms and prevent complications. It usually includes a combination of therapies, such as: Physical therapy to help keep muscles flexible and strong Occupational therapy to relearn lost motor skills and learn ways to work around weakened muscles Respiratory care, such as breathing exercises, oxygen therapy , and ventilators Speech therapy to help with speech and swallowing problems Assistive devices , such as wheelchairs, splints and braces, and walkers Medicines to help delay damage to muscles or minimize the symptoms of MD Surgery to treat some of the conditions associated with MD, such as heart problems, scoliosis , and cataracts NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Neural tube defects are birth defects of the brain, spine, or spinal cord. They happen in the first month of pregnancy, often before a woman even knows that she is pregnant. The two most common neural tube defects are spina bifida and anencephaly. In spina bifida, the fetal spinal column doesn't close completely. There is usually nerve damage that causes at least some paralysis of the legs. In anencephaly, most of the brain and skull do not develop. Babies with anencephaly are usually either stillborn or die shortly after birth. Another type of defect, Chiari malformation , causes the brain tissue to extend into the spinal canal. The exact causes of neural tube defects aren't known. You're at greater risk of having an infant with a neural tube defect if you: Have obesity Have poorly controlled diabetes Take certain antiseizure medicines Getting enough folic acid , a type of B vitamin, before and during pregnancy prevents most neural tube defects. Neural tube defects are usually diagnosed before the infant is born, through lab or imaging tests. There is no cure for neural tube defects. The nerve damage and loss of function that are present at birth are usually permanent. However, a variety of treatments can sometimes prevent further damage and help with complications. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Neurofibromatosis is a genetic disorder of the nervous system. It mainly affects how nerve cells form and grow. It causes tumors to grow on nerves.  You can get neurofibromatosis from your parents, or it can happen because of a mutation (change) in your genes.  Once you have it, you can pass it along to your children. Usually the tumors are benign, but sometimes they can become cancerous. There are three types of neurofibromatosis: Type 1 (NF1) causes skin changes and deformed bones. It usually starts in childhood.  Sometimes the symptoms are present at birth. Type 2 (NF2) causes hearing loss, ringing in the ears, and poor balance. Symptoms often start in the teen years. Schwannomatosis causes intense pain. It is the rarest type. Doctors diagnose the different types based on the symptoms. Genetic testing is also used to diagnose NF1 and NF2. There is no cure. Treatment can help control symptoms. Depending on the type of disease and how serious it is, treatment may include surgery to remove tumors, radiation therapy, and medicines. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Your newborn infant has screening tests before leaving the hospital. There may be different tests depending on the state where you live. They include: Tests on a few drops of blood from pricking the baby's heel. The tests look for inherited disorders. All states test for at least 30 of these conditions. A hearing test that measures the baby's response to sound A skin test that measures the level of oxygen in the blood. This can tell if the baby has a congenital heart defect. These tests look for serious medical conditions. If not treated, some of these conditions can cause lifelong health problems. Others can cause early death. With early diagnosis, treatment can begin right away, before serious problems can occur or become permanent. If a screening shows that your baby might have a condition, the health care provider or the state health department will call you. It is important to follow up quickly. Further testing can verify whether your baby has the condition. If so, treatment should start right away. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder in which bones fracture (break) easily. Sometimes the fractures happen for no known reason. OI can also cause weak muscles, brittle teeth, a curved spine, and hearing loss. OI is caused by one of several genes that aren't working properly.  When these genes don't work, it affects how you make collagen, a protein that helps make bones strong. OI can range from mild to severe, and symptoms vary from person to person. A person may have just a few or as many as several hundred fractures in a lifetime. There is no specific test for OI. Your doctor uses your medical and family history, physical exam, and imaging and lab tests to diagnose it. Your doctor may also test your collagen (from skin) or genes (from blood). There is no cure, but you can manage symptoms. Treatments include exercise, pain medicine, physical therapy, wheelchairs, braces, and surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a type of amino acid metabolism disorder . It is inherited. If you have it, your body can't process phenylalanine (Phe). Phe is an amino acid, a building block of proteins. It is in almost all foods. If your Phe level gets too high, it can damage your brain and cause severe intellectual disability.  All babies born in U.S. hospitals must now have a screening test for PKU. This makes it easier to diagnose and treat the problem early. The best treatment for PKU is a diet of low-protein foods. There are special formulas for newborns.  For older children and adults, the diet includes many fruits and vegetables. It also includes some low-protein breads, pastas, and cereals. Nutritional formulas provide the vitamins and minerals you can't get from their food. Babies who get on this special diet soon after they are born develop normally. Many have no symptoms of PKU. It is important to stay on the diet for the rest of your life. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder. It causes poor muscle tone, low levels of sex hormones and a constant feeling of hunger. The part of the brain that controls feelings of fullness or hunger does not work properly in people with PWS. They overeat, leading to obesity . Babies with PWS are usually floppy, with poor muscle tone, and have trouble sucking. Boys may have undescended testicles. Later, other signs appear. These include: Short stature Poor motor skills Weight gain Underdeveloped sex organs Mild intellectual and learning disabilities There is no cure for PWS. Growth hormone, exercise, and dietary supervision can help build muscle mass and control weight. Other treatments may include sex hormones and behavior therapy. Most people with PWS will need specialized care and supervision throughout their lives. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Not all medicines are safe to take when you are pregnant . Some medicines can harm your baby. That includes over-the-counter or prescription drugs, herbs, and supplements. Always speak with your health care provider before you start or stop any medicine. Not using medicine that you need may be more harmful to you and your baby than using the medicine. For example, many pregnant women take prescription medicines for health problems like diabetes, asthma, seizures, and heartburn. The decision about whether or not to take a medicine depends on the risks and benefits.  You and your health care provider should make this choice together. Pregnant women should not take regular vitamins. They may have too much or too little of the vitamins that you need. There are special vitamins for pregnant women.  It is important to take 0.4 mg of folic acid every day before you become pregnant through the first part of your pregnancy. Folic acid helps to prevent birth defects of the baby's brain or spine. Food and Drug Administration

Prenatal testing provides information about your baby's health before he or she is born. Some routine tests during pregnancy also check on your health. At your first prenatal visit , your health care provider will test for a number of things, including problems with your blood, signs of infections , and whether you are immune to rubella (German measles) and chickenpox . Throughout your pregnancy, your health care provider may suggest a number of other tests, too. Some tests are suggested for all women, such as screenings for gestational diabetes , Down syndrome , and HIV . Other tests might be offered based on your: Age Personal or family medical history Ethnic background Results of routine tests There are two types of tests: Screening tests are tests that are done to see if you or your baby might have certain problems. They evaluate risk, but do not diagnose problems. If your screening test result is abnormal, it does not mean that there is a problem. It means that more information is needed. Your health care provider can explain what the test results mean and possible next steps. You may need diagnostic testing. Diagnostic tests show whether or not you or your baby have a certain problem. It is your choice whether or not to get the prenatal tests. You and your health care provider can discuss the risks and benefits of the tests, and what kind of information the tests can give you. Then you can decide which ones are right for you. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

A rare disease is one that affects fewer than 200,000 people in the United States. There are nearly 7,000 rare diseases. More than 25 million Americans have one. Rare diseases: May involve chronic illness, disability, and often premature death Often have no treatment or not very effective treatment Are frequently not diagnosed correctly Are often very complex Are often caused by changes in genes It can be hard to find a specialist who knows how to treat your rare disease.  Disease advocacy groups, rare disease organizations, and genetics clinics may help you to find one. NIH: National Institutes of Health

Rett syndrome is a rare genetic disease that causes developmental and nervous system problems, mostly in girls.  It's related to autism spectrum disorder . Babies with Rett syndrome seem to grow and develop normally at first. Between 3 months and 3 years of age, though, they stop developing and even lose some skills. Symptoms include: Loss of speech Loss of hand movements such as grasping Compulsive movements such as hand wringing Balance problems Breathing problems Behavior problems Learning problems or intellectual disability Rett syndrome has no cure. You can treat some of the symptoms with medicines, surgery, and physical and speech therapy. Most people with Rett syndrome live into middle age and beyond. They will usually need care throughout their lives. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is sickle cell disease (SCD)? Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a group of inherited red blood cell disorders. If you have SCD, there is a problem with your hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen throughout the body. With SCD, the hemoglobin forms into stiff rods within the red blood cells. This changes the shape of the red blood cells. The cells are supposed to be disc-shaped, but instead they are crescent, or sickle, shaped. The sickle-shaped cells are not flexible and cannot change shape easily. Many of them burst apart as they move through your blood vessels. The sickle cells usually only last 10 to 20 days, instead of the normal 90 to 120 days. Your body may have trouble making enough new cells to replace the ones that you lost. Because of this, you may not have enough red blood cells. This is a condition called anemia , and it can make you feel tired. The sickle-shaped cells can also stick to vessel walls, causing a blockage that slows or stops the flow of blood. When this happens, oxygen can't reach nearby tissues. The lack of oxygen can cause attacks of sudden, severe pain, called pain crises. These attacks can occur without warning. If you get one, you might need to go to the hospital for treatment. What causes sickle cell disease (SCD)? SCD is caused by a variant (change) in a gene that has instructions for your body to make one part of the hemoglobin. This changed gene is sometimes called a sickle cell gene. People with SCD are born with two sickle cell genes, one from each parent. If you are born with one sickle cell gene, it's called sickle cell trait. People with sickle cell trait are generally healthy, but they can pass the defective gene on to their children. Who is more likely to have sickle cell disease (SCD)? In the United States, most of the people with SCD are African Americans: About 1 in 13 Black or African American babies are born with sickle cell trait About 1 in every 365 Black or African American babies are born with sickle cell disease SCD also affects some people who come from Hispanic, southern European, Middle Eastern, or Asian Indian backgrounds. What are the symptoms of sickle cell disease (SCD)? People with SCD start to have signs of the disease during the first year of life, usually around 5 or 6 months of age. Early symptoms of SCD may include: Painful swelling of the hands and feet Fatigue or fussiness from anemia A yellowish color of the skin ( jaundice ) or the whites of the eyes (icterus) The effects of SCD vary from person to person and can change over time. Most of the signs and symptoms of SCD are related to complications of the disease. They may include severe pain, anemia, organ damage, and infections. How is sickle cell disease (SCD) diagnosed? A blood test can show if you have SCD or sickle cell trait. Genetic tests can tell if you have one or two copies of the sickle cell gene. Genetic tests can help confirm an SCD diagnosis if the results from blood tests are not clear. All states now test newborns for SCD (as well as many other treatable conditions) as part of their screening programs . These programs help find the conditions early, so treatment can be started right away. Health care providers can also diagnose SCD before a baby is born. That test uses a sample of amniotic fluid (the liquid in the sac surrounding the baby) or tissue taken from the placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to the baby). People who are thinking about having children can have the test to find out how likely it is that their children will have SCD. What are the treatments for sickle cell disease (SCD)? There are many ways to manage sickle cell disease. Your medical team will probably include a hematologist, a doctor who specializes in blood diseases. You will work with your medical team to set up a treatment plan. Possible treatment options may include: Treatments that can help relieve symptoms and lessen complications, including: Hydroxyurea, a medicine to reduce sickling of red blood cells. This can help prevent serious symptoms of sickle cell disease. This medicine can be used in adults and in children as young as 9 months old.  But this medicine is not safe during pregnancy. Voxelotor, another medicine to prevent the sickling of red blood cells. It can be used in adults and children ages 4 years and older. Pain relievers for acute or chronic pain. Antibiotics to try to prevent infections in younger children. Blood transfusions for severe anemia. If you have had some serious complications, such as a stroke , you may have transfusions to prevent more complications. Other treatments for specific complications, such as medicines to lower blood pressure and vitamins to treat a vitamin deficiency. Bone marrow or stem cell transplantation, which can cure SCD. Because these transplants are risky and can have serious side effects, they are usually only used in children with severe SCD. For the transplant to work, the bone marrow must be a close match. Usually, the best donor is a brother or sister. Gene therapies to treat SCD in people who are 12 years and older and have had repeated sickle cell crises. These new therapies involve taking some of your blood stem cells and either adding new DNA to them or changing their existing DNA. Then these cells are given back to you, and they can make a type of hemoglobin that is healthy. This can reduce the complications of SCD, including the SCD crises. Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) seems to help some people deal with pain caused by SCD. These types of CAM may lower your pain, especially if it is not well managed with medicines:: Cognitive behavioral therapy (a type of counseling) Acupuncture Exercise or movement programs, such as yoga Massage Meditation and mindfulness practices Virtual reality, a computer-generated 3D environment you can see with special goggles It's also important to take steps to keep yourself as healthy as possible: Get regular medical care Get your routine vaccinations Live a healthy lifestyle Avoid situations that may set off a pain crisis NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Spina bifida is a neural tube defect - a type of birth defect of the brain, spine, or spinal cord. It happens if the spinal column of the fetus doesn't close completely during the first month of pregnancy. This can damage the nerves and spinal cord. Screening tests during pregnancy can check for spina bifida. Sometimes it is discovered only after the baby is born. The symptoms of spina bifida vary from person to person. Most people with spina bifida are of normal intelligence. Some people need assistive devices such as braces, crutches, or wheelchairs. They may have learning difficulties, urinary and bowel problems, or hydrocephalus , a buildup of fluid in the brain. The exact cause of spina bifida is unknown. It seems to run in families. Taking folic acid can reduce the risk of having a baby with spina bifida. It's in most multivitamins. Women who could become pregnant should take it daily. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)? Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a group of genetic diseases that damages and kills motor neurons. Motor neurons are a type of nerve cell in the spinal cord and lower part of the brain. They control movement in your arms, legs, face, chest, throat, and tongue. As the motor neurons die off, your muscles start to weaken and atrophy (waste away). The muscle damage gets worse over time and can affect speaking, walking, swallowing, and breathing. What are the types of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and what are their symptoms? There are different types of SMA. They are based on how serious the disease is and when the symptoms start: Type l is also called Werdnig-Hoffman disease or infantile-onset SMA. It is the most severe type. It is also the most common. Babies with this type usually show signs of the disease before 6 months of age. In more severe cases, the signs show up even before or just after birth (Types 0 or 1A). The babies may have trouble swallowing and breathing and may not move around a lot. They have chronic shortening of muscles or tendons (called contractures). They usually cannot sit up without help. Without treatment, many children with this type will die before 2 years of age. Type ll is a moderate to severe type of SMA. It usually first noticed between 6 and 18 months of age. Most children with this type can sit without support but cannot stand or walk without help. They may also have trouble breathing. They can usually live into adolescence or young adulthood. Type lll is also called Kugelberg-Welander disease. It is the mildest type that affects children. The signs of the disease usually show up after age 18 months. Children with this type can walk by themselves but may have trouble running, getting up from a chair, or climbing stairs. They may also have scoliosis (curvature of the spine), contractures, and respiratory infections. With treatment, most children with this type will have a normal lifespan. Type IV is rare and often mild. It usually causes symptoms after 21 years of age. The symptoms include mild to moderate leg muscle weakness, tremors , and mild breathing problems. The symptoms slowly get worse over time. People with this type of SMA have a normal lifespan. What causes spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)? Most types of SMA are caused by a change in the SMN1 gene . This gene is responsible for making a protein that the motor neurons need to be healthy and to function. But when part of the SMN1 gene is missing or abnormal, there isn't enough protein for the motor neurons. This causes the motor neurons to die off. Most people have two copies of the SM1 gene - one from each parent. SMA normally only happens when both copies have the gene change. If only one copy has the change, there usually aren't any symptoms. But that gene could be passed down from parent to child. Some of the less common types of SMA may be caused by changes in other genes. How is spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose SMA: A physical exam A medical history, including asking about family history Genetic testing to check for the gene changes that cause SMA Electromyography and nerve conduction studies and a muscle biopsy may be done, especially if no gene changes were found Parents who have a family history of SMA may want to do a prenatal test to check to see whether their baby has an SMN1 gene change. An amniocentesis or in some cases a chorionic villi sampling (CVS) is used to get the sample for testing. In some states, genetic testing for SMA is part of newborn screening tests . What are the treatments for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)? There is no cure for SMA. Treatments can help manage symptoms and prevent complications. They may include: Medicines to help the body make more of the proteins that the motor neurons need Gene therapy for children under 2 years of age Physical, occupational, and rehabilitation therapy to help to improve posture and the mobility of the joints. These therapies may also improve blood flow and slow muscle weakness and atrophy. Some people may also need therapy for trouble speaking , chewing, and swallowing. Assistive devices such as supports or braces, orthotics, speech synthesizers, and wheelchairs to help people stay more independent Good nutrition and a balanced diet to help maintain weight and strength. Some people might need a feeding tube in order to get the nutrition they need. Breathing support for people who have muscle weakness in the neck, throat, and chest. The support may include devices to help with breathing during the day and to prevent sleep apnea at night. Some people might need to be on a ventilator. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Tay-Sachs disease is a rare, inherited disease. It is a type of lipid metabolism disorder . It causes too much of a fatty substance to build up in the brain. This buildup destroys nerve cells, causing mental and physical problems. Infants with Tay-Sachs disease appear to develop normally for the first few months of life. Then mental and physical abilities decline. The child becomes blind, deaf, and unable to swallow. Muscles begin to waste away and paralysis sets in. Even with the best of care, children with Tay-Sachs disease usually die by age 4. The cause is a gene mutation which is most common in Eastern European Ashkenazi Jews. To get the disease, both parents must have the gene.  If they do, there is a 25% chance of the child having the disease. A blood test and prenatal tests can check for the gene or the disease. There is no cure. Medicines and good nutrition can help some symptoms. Some children need feeding tubes. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

If you have Tourette syndrome, you make unusual movements or sounds, called tics. You have little or no control over them. Common tics are throat-clearing and blinking. You may repeat words, spin, or, rarely, blurt out swear words. Tourette syndrome is a disorder of the nervous system. It often occurs with other problems, such as: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) Anxiety Depression The cause of Tourette syndrome is unknown. It is more common in boys than girls. The tics usually start in childhood and may be worst in the early teens.  Many people eventually outgrow them. No treatment is needed unless the tics interfere with everyday life. Excitement or worry can make tics worse. Calm, focused activities may make them better. Medicines and talk therapy may also help. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Tuberous sclerosis is a rare genetic disease that causes benign tumors to grow in the brain and other organs. Symptoms vary, depending on where the tumors grow. They could include: Skin problems, such as light patches and thickened skin Seizures Behavior problems Intellectual disabilities Kidney problems Some people have signs of tuberous sclerosis at birth. In others it can take time for the symptoms to develop. The disease can be mild, or it can cause severe disabilities. In rare cases, tumors in vital organs or other symptoms can be life-threatening. Tuberous sclerosis has no cure, but treatments can help symptoms. Options include medicines, educational and occupational therapy, surgery, or surgery to treat specific complications. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is Turner syndrome? Turner syndrome is a genetic disorder that affects a girl's development and appearance. It can also cause health problems such as infertility and heart problems . What causes Turner syndrome? Turner syndrome happens because of a problem with a chromosome. Chromosomes are tiny "packages" in your cells that contain your genes. Genes carry information, called DNA, that controls what you look like and how your body works.  Normally, girls receive one X chromosome from each parent. Turner syndrome happens when one of the X chromosomes is partially or completely missing. What are the symptoms of Turner syndrome? Turner syndrome can cause many different symptoms. The symptoms may be mild for some people. But for others, Turner syndrome can cause serious health problems. Some of the symptoms of Turner syndrome affect a person's appearance. Most people with Turner syndrome are shorter than average. They may also have physical features such as: A neck that is short and has extra skin (a "webbed" neck) A low hairline in the back Low-set ears Swollen hands and feet People with Turner syndrome may be born with heart and kidney defects. They usually don't have typical sexual development and are infertile. They are also at risk for other health problems such as high blood pressure , type 2 diabetes , osteoporosis , and thyroid problems . How is Turner syndrome diagnosed? Health care providers diagnose Turner syndrome based on symptoms and a genetic blood test called a karyotype test . Sometimes it is found in prenatal testing . What are the treatments for Turner syndrome? There is no cure for Turner syndrome, but there are treatments for some of the symptoms: If they are started in early childhood, hormone injections can often increase adult height by a few inches Estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) can help start sexual development. It also protects against bone loss Assisted reproduction technologies can help some women with Turner syndrome get pregnant People who have Turner syndrome need regular health checks. It's also important for them to have a care team that includes specialists who can treat the health problems caused by Turner syndrome. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Usher syndrome is an inherited disease that causes serious hearing loss and retinitis pigmentosa , an eye disorder that causes your vision to get worse over time. It is the most common condition that affects both hearing and vision. There are three types of Usher syndrome: People with type I are deaf from birth and have severe balance problems from a young age. Vision problems usually start by age 10 and lead to blindness. People with type II have moderate to severe hearing loss and normal balance. Vision problems start in the early teens and get worse more slowly than in type I. People with type III are born with normal hearing and near-normal balance but develop vision problems and then hearing loss. There is no cure. Tools such as hearing aids or cochlear implants can help some people. Training such as Braille instruction, low-vision services, or auditory training can also help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

What is Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL)? Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a rare disease that causes tumors and cysts to grow in your body. They can grow in your brain and spinal cord, kidneys, pancreas, adrenal glands, and reproductive tract. The tumors are usually benign (non-cancerous). But some tumors, such as those in the kidney and pancreas, can become cancerous. What causes Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL)? Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a genetic disease. It is inherited, which means that it is passed down from parent to child. What are the symptoms of Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL)? Symptoms of VHL depend on the size and location of the tumors. They may include: Headaches Problems with balance and walking Dizziness Weakness of the limbs Vision problems High blood pressure How is Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) diagnosed? Detecting and treating VHL early is important. Your health care provider may suspect that you have VHL if you have certain patterns of cysts and tumors. There is a genetic test for VHL. If you have it, you will need other tests, including imaging tests, to look for tumors and cysts. What are the treatments for Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL)? Treatment can vary, depending on the location and size of the tumors and cysts. It usually involves surgery. Certain tumors may be treated with radiation therapy. The goal is to treat growths while they are small and before they do permanent damage. You will need to have careful monitoring by a doctor and/or medical team familiar with the disorder. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Wilson disease is a rare inherited disorder that prevents your body from getting rid of extra copper.  You need a small amount of copper from food to stay healthy. Too much copper is poisonous. Normally, your liver releases extra copper into bile, a digestive fluid.  With Wilson disease, the copper builds up in your liver, and it releases the copper directly into your bloodstream. This can cause damage to your brain, kidneys, and eyes. Wilson disease is present at birth, but symptoms usually start between ages 5 and 35. It first attacks the liver, the central nervous system or both. The most characteristic sign is a rusty brown ring around the cornea of the eye. A physical exam and laboratory tests can diagnose it. Treatment is with drugs to remove the extra copper from your body.  You need to take medicine and follow a low-copper diet for the rest of your life. Don't eat shellfish or liver, as these foods may contain high levels of copper.  At the beginning of treatment, you'll also need to avoid chocolate, mushrooms, and nuts. Have your drinking water checked for copper content and don't take multivitamins that contain copper. With early detection and proper treatment, you can enjoy good health. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

An abscess is a pocket of pus. You can get an abscess almost anywhere in your body. When an area of your body becomes infected, your body's immune system tries to fight the infection. White blood cells go to the infected area, collect within the damaged tissue, and cause inflammation. During this process, pus forms. Pus is a mixture of living and dead white blood cells, germs, and dead tissue. Bacteria, viruses, parasites and swallowed objects can all lead to abscesses. Skin abscesses are easy to detect. They are red, raised and painful. Abscesses inside your body may not be obvious and can damage organs, including the brain, lungs and others. Treatments include drainage and antibiotics.

Bronchitis is an inflammation of the bronchial tubes, the airways that carry air to your lungs. It causes a cough that often brings up mucus. It can also cause shortness of breath, wheezing, a low fever, and chest tightness. There are two main types of bronchitis: acute and chronic . Most cases of acute bronchitis get better within several days. But your cough can last for several weeks after the infection is gone. The same viruses that cause colds and the flu often cause acute bronchitis. These viruses spread through the air when people cough, or though physical contact (for example, on unwashed hands). Being exposed to tobacco smoke, air pollution, dusts, vapors, and fumes can also cause acute bronchitis. Less often, bacteria can also cause acute bronchitis. To diagnose acute bronchitis, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and listen to your breathing. You may also have other tests. Treatments include rest, fluids, and aspirin (for adults) or acetaminophen to treat fever. A humidifier or steam can also help. You may need inhaled medicine to open your airways if you are wheezing. Antibiotics won't help if the cause is viral. You may get antibiotics if the cause is bacterial. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a neurologic disease . It is rare, but serious. It affects an area of the spinal cord called gray matter. This can cause the muscles and reflexes in the body to become weak. Because of these symptoms, some people call AFM a "polio-like" illness. But it is different from polio . AFM is not caused by polioviruses. What causes acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? AFM can be caused by several different viruses. Researchers think that enteroviruses have been causing the recent increases in the number of children with AFM. AFM can also be caused by other viruses, including flaviviruses, herpesviruses, and adenoviruses. Most people with AFM had a mild respiratory illness or fever (like you would get from a viral infection ) before they got AFM. Who is more likely to develop acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? Anyone can get AFM, but most cases (more than 90%) have been in young children. What are the symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? Most people with AFM will suddenly have: Arm or leg weakness A loss of muscle tone and reflexes Some people also have other symptoms, including: Facial drooping/weakness Trouble moving the eyes Drooping eyelids Trouble swallowing Slurred speech Pain in the arms, legs, back, or neck Sometimes AFM can weaken the muscles that you need for breathing. This can lead to respiratory failure , which is very serious. If you get respiratory failure, you may need to use a ventilator (breathing machine) to help you breathe. If you or your child develops any of these symptoms, get medical care right away. How is acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) diagnosed? AFM causes many of the same symptoms as other neurologic diseases, such as transverse myelitis and Guillain-Barre syndrome . This can make it difficult to diagnose. To find out if you have AFM, your doctor may use: A neurologic exam , including looking at where there is weakness, poor muscle tone, and decreased reflexes An MRI to look at the spinal cord and brain Lab tests on the cerebrospinal fluid (the fluid around the brain and spinal cord) Nerve conduction and electromyography (EMG) studies . These tests check nerve speed and the response of muscles to the messages from the nerves. It is important that the tests are done as soon as possible after the symptoms start. What are the treatments for acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? There is no specific treatment for AFM. A doctor who specializes in treating brain and spinal cord illnesses (neurologist) may recommend treatments for specific symptoms. For example, physical and/or occupational therapy may help with arm or leg weakness. Researchers do not know the long-term outcomes of people who get AFM. Can acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) be prevented? There is no specific way to prevent AFM. But you can take steps to prevent getting sick from a virus by: Washing your hands often with soap and water Avoiding touching your face with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch, including toys Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or upper shirt sleeve, not hands Staying home when sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Animal diseases that people can catch are called zoonoses.   Many diseases affecting humans can be traced to animals or animal products. You can get a disease directly from an animal, or indirectly, through the environment. Farm animals can carry diseases. If you touch them or things they have touched, like fencing or buckets, wash your hands thoroughly. Adults should make sure children who visit farms or petting zoos wash up as well. Though they may be cute and cuddly, wild animals may carry germs, viruses, and parasites. Deer and deer mice carry ticks that cause Lyme disease . Some wild animals may carry rabies . Enjoy wildlife from a distance. Pets can also make you sick. Reptiles pose a particular risk. Turtles, snakes and iguanas can transmit Salmonella bacteria to their owners. You can get rabies from an infected dog or toxoplasmosis from handling kitty litter of an infected cat. The chance that your dog or cat will make you sick is small. You can reduce the risk by practicing good hygiene, keeping pet areas clean and keeping your pets' shots up-to-date.

Anthrax is a disease caused by Bacillus anthracis, a germ that lives in soil. Many people know about it from the 2001 bioterror attacks. In the attacks, someone purposely spread anthrax through the U.S. mail. This killed five people and made 22 sick. Anthrax is rare. It affects animals such as cattle, sheep, and goats more often than people. People can get anthrax from contact with infected animals, wool, meat, or hides. It can cause three forms of disease in people. They are: Cutaneous, which affects the skin. People with cuts or open sores can get it if they touch the bacteria. Inhalation, which affects the lungs. You can get this if you breathe in spores of the bacteria. Gastrointestinal, which affects the digestive system. You can get it by eating infected meat. Antibiotics often cure anthrax if it is diagnosed early. But many people don't know they have anthrax until it is too late to treat. A vaccine to prevent anthrax is available for people in the military and others at high risk.

What are antibiotics? Antibiotics are medicines that treat bacterial infections in humans and animals. They work by killing the bacteria or making it hard for the bacteria to grow and multiply. When used properly, antibiotics can save lives. But there is a growing problem of antibiotic resistance. What is antibiotic resistance? Antibiotic resistance happens when bacteria change and can resist the effects of an antibiotic. The bacteria are not killed, and they continue to grow. The infections these bacteria cause are called resistant infections. Resistant infections can be difficult, and sometimes impossible, to treat. In some cases, they can even be deadly. Antibiotic resistance does not mean that your body is resistant to antibiotics. There are many different types of resistant infections. They include MRSA and drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB). If you get a resistant infection, you might need: A long hospital stay A long recovery Follow-up visits with health care providers Treatments that are expensive and may have severe side effects Antibiotic resistance is one type of antimicrobial resistance. There are other types; viruses , fungi , and parasites can also become resistant to medicines. How do bacteria become resistant to antibiotics? Antibiotic resistance is a natural process that happens over time. To survive, bacteria can develop defense strategies against antibiotics. This happens through genetic changes in the bacteria. These resistant bacteria survive, grow, and spread. Each time you take antibiotics, there is a risk that the bacteria will become resistant. So it is important to only take antibiotics when you really need them. They won't work on viral infections such as colds and the flu . And you don't need antibiotics for every bacterial infection. For example, you may not need them for some sinus and ear infections. Who is more likely to develop an antibiotic-resistant infection? Anyone can develop an antibiotic-resistant infection, but certain people may be at higher risk, including those who: Have a weakened immune system from diseases such as HIV or from taking medicines that affect the immune system Are getting medical care such as surgery and hospital stays Take antibiotics for a long time Are infants, especially if they were born prematurely Are older adults How can antibiotic resistance be prevented? There will always be some antibiotic resistance, since it happens naturally. But you can help fight against antibiotic resistance by taking these steps: Don't use antibiotics for viruses. Don't pressure your health care provider to give you an antibiotic if they don't think you need one. When you take antibiotics, follow the directions carefully. Don't share your antibiotics with others. Don't save antibiotics for later or use someone else's prescription. Help prevent the spread of bacterial infections with good hygiene habits . These include washing your hands often and covering your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are antibiotics? Antibiotics are medicines that fight bacterial infections in people and animals. They work by killing the bacteria or by making it hard for the bacteria to grow and multiply. Antibiotics can be taken in different ways: Orally (by mouth). This could be pills, capsules, or liquids. Topically. This might be a cream, spray, or ointment that you put on your skin. It could also be eye ointment, eye drops, or ear drops. Through an injection or intravenously (IV). This is usually for more serious infections. What do antibiotics treat? Antibiotics only treat certain bacterial infections, such as strep throat, urinary tract infections , and E. coli . You may not need to take antibiotics for some bacterial infections. For example, you might not need them for many sinus infections or some ear infections . Taking antibiotics when they're not needed won't help you, and they can have side effects. Your health care provider can decide the best treatment for you when you're sick. Don't ask your provider to prescribe an antibiotic for you. Do antibiotics treat viral infections? Antibiotics do not work on viral infections. For example, you shouldn't take antibiotics for: Colds and runny noses, even if the mucus is thick, yellow, or green Most sore throats (except strep throat) Flu Most cases of bronchitis What are the side effects of antibiotics? The side effects of antibiotics range from minor to very severe. Some of the common side effects include: Rash Nausea Diarrhea Yeast infections More serious side effects can include: C. diff infections , which cause diarrhea that can lead to severe colon damage and sometimes even death Severe and life-threatening allergic reactions Antibiotic resistance infections Call your health care provider if you develop any side effects while taking your antibiotic. Why is it important to take antibiotics only when they're needed? You should only take antibiotics when they are needed because they can cause side effects and can contribute to antibiotic resistance . Antibiotic resistance happens when the bacteria change and become able to resist the effects of an antibiotic. This means that the bacteria continue to grow. How do I use antibiotics correctly? When you take antibiotics, it is important that you take them responsibly: Always follow the directions carefully. Finish your medicine even if you feel better. If you stop taking them too soon, some bacteria may survive and re-infect you. Don't save your antibiotics for later. Don't share your antibiotic with others. Don't take antibiotics prescribed for someone else. This may delay the best treatment for you, make you even sicker, or cause side effects. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Aspergillosis is a disease caused by a fungus (or mold) called Aspergillus.  The fungus is very common in both indoors and outdoors. Most people breathe in the spores of the fungus every day without being affected. But some people get the disease. It usually occurs in people with lung diseases or weakened immune systems. There are different kinds of aspergillosis. One kind is allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (also called ABPA).  Symptoms of ABPA include wheezing and coughing. ABPA can affect healthy people but it is most common in people with asthma or cystic fibrosis. Another kind is invasive aspergillosis, which damages tissues in the body. It usually affects the lungs. Sometimes it can also cause infection in other organs and spread throughout the body. It affects people who have immune system problems, such as people who have had a transplant, are taking high doses of steroids, or getting chemotherapy for some cancers. Your doctor might do a variety of tests to make the diagnosis, including a chest x-ray, CT scan of the lungs, and  an examination of tissues for signs of the fungus. Treatment is with antifungal drugs. If you have ABPA, you may also take steroids. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Athlete's foot is a common infection caused by a fungus.  It most often affects the space between the toes. Symptoms include itching, burning, and cracked, scaly skin between your toes. You can get athlete's foot from damp surfaces, such as showers, swimming pools, and locker room floors. To prevent it: Keep your feet clean, dry, and cool Wear clean socks Don't walk barefoot in public areas Wear flip-flops in locker room showers Keep your toenails clean and clipped short Treatments include over-the-counter antifungal creams for most cases and prescription medicines for more serious infections. These usually clear up the infection, but it can come back. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are bacteria? Bacteria are tiny organisms (living things) that have only one cell. Under a microscope, they look like balls, rods, or spirals. They can be found almost everywhere on Earth. There are lots of bacteria in and on your body. In fact, your body has about 10 times more bacteria cells than human cells. There are many different types of bacteria. Most types don't make you sick. Some types are helpful. For example, "good" bacteria in your digestive system can help your body digest food and absorb vitamins and minerals . They can help protect you from getting sick. Bacteria are also used in making foods like yogurt and cheese. But some types of bacteria can cause an infection and make you sick. They are called infectious bacteria. These bacteria can reproduce quickly in your body. Many of them give off toxins (poisons) that can damage your cells and make you sick. Other types can move into and damage your tissues. A few examples of bacteria that cause infections include Streptococcus , Staphylococcus , and E. coli . How do bacterial infections spread? There are different ways that bacterial infections may spread: Through droplets and particles that are breathed out by someone who has the infection. You might breathe in the droplets or particles, or they could land on your mouth, nose, or eyes. By touching surfaces or objects that have the bacteria on them and then touching your mouth, nose, or eyes. Through cuts, scrapes, and skin-to-skin contact with someone who has the infection. From the pregnant parent to the baby during pregnancy . Through contaminated food or water . By being bitten by an infected insect or animal . Through sexual contact (usually vaginal, anal and oral sex) with someone who has the infection. What are the treatments for bacterial infections? Sometimes your immune system may be able to fight off a bacterial infection. But when you do need treatment, it will be with antibiotics . When you take antibiotics, follow the directions carefully. Each time you take them, there is a risk that the bacteria will become resistant to the effects of the antibiotics. This is called antibiotic resistance . When this happens, the bacteria are not killed, and they continue to grow. They can cause resistant infections, which can be difficult, and sometimes impossible, to treat. Can bacterial infections be prevented? You can help prevent some bacterial infections by: Getting vaccines that protect against bacterial infections. Having good hygiene habits . These include washing your hands often and covering your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing. Paying attention to food safety . Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that your frequently touch. Preventing insect bites by using a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. when you go outdoors. If you travel to an area that has a high risk of diseases from insect bites, also wear long pants, shirts, and socks. Practicing safe sex. This means using a latex condom every time you have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Avoiding close contact with people who are sick.

What is bird flu? Birds, just like people, can get the flu. Another name for bird flu is avian influenza. The viruses that cause bird flu normally only infect birds, including chickens, other poultry, and wild birds such as ducks. But sometimes the viruses can infect other animals and, in rare cases, people. A few types of these viruses have caused most of the infections in people. They are the H5N1, H7N9, and H5N6 viruses. These infections in people have mainly been in Asia, Africa, Europe, the Pacific, and the Near East. Although it's very rare, there have also been some infections in people in the United States. How do you get bird flu? The most common ways you can get bird flu are from: Touching your eyes, nose, or mouth after handling infected live or dead birds Touching surfaces or handling items contaminated by bird flu viruses and then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth Breathing in droplets or dust contaminated with the virus It's also possible (but very rare) to get bird flu from: Another type of animal who has bird flu. Bird flu can also infect many other animals, including some dogs, cats, certain wild and zoo animals, and livestock such as cattle. These animals can then spread the flu to people. Another person. Eating poultry, eggs, and beef that were not properly handled and cooked. Drinking raw milk. Who is more likely to get bird flu? Certain people may be more likely to get bird flu, including: Poultry workers Animal handlers Wildlife biologists Disease control workers Research laboratory workers Veterinarians People who travel to countries where bird flu is present What are the symptoms of bird flu in humans? Sometimes bird flu doesn't cause any symptoms. But if you do feel sick, your symptoms can range from mild to severe. Often, the symptoms are similar to the (seasonal) flu , such as: Fever (but not everyone has a fever) Cough Sore throat Runny or stuffy nose Muscle or body aches Fatigue Headaches Eye redness ( conjunctivitis ) Trouble breathing Diarrhea People with severe illness from bird flu may have pneumonia and might need to be hospitalized. How is bird flu diagnosed? Laboratory testing is used to diagnose bird flu. It's usually done with a nasal or throat swab . This testing is more accurate when the swab is collected during the first few days of illness. For people who are severely ill, health care providers may do testing of a different sample, such as fluid taken during a bronchoalveolar lavage or other procedure. What are the treatments for bird flu? Bird flu is treated with antiviral medicines. It's important to get them as soon as possible. The medicines may make your illness less severe. You may also be given antiviral medicines if you were exposed to a person or animal who has the virus. This may help prevent you from getting sick. Can bird flu be prevented? There is currently no vaccine available to the public. The government has developed a virus that is similar to some H5N1 viruses. The virus could be used to produce a vaccine for people, if needed. It's important to take precautions to prevent bird flu: If you have a job or pastime that puts you in contact with birds or other animals, make sure to use proper protective equipment. Otherwise try to avoid direct contact with wild birds and other animals. Wash your hands with soap and water after touching birds or other animals. Since it's possible to get bird flu through some foods, make sure to handle and cook your food safely and avoid raw milk. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are body lice? Body lice (also called clothes lice) are tiny insects which live and lay nits (lice eggs) on clothing. They are parasites, and they need to feed on human blood to survive. They usually only move to the skin to feed. Body lice are one of the three types of lice that live on humans. The other two types are head lice and pubic lice . Each type of lice is different, and getting one type does not mean that you will get another type. Body lice can spread diseases, such as typhus, trench fever, and relapsing fever. How do body lice spread? Body lice move by crawling, because they cannot hop or fly. One way that they spread is through physical contact with a person who has body lice. They can also spread through contact with clothing, beds, bed linens, or towels that were used by a person with body lice. You cannot get lice from animals. Who is at risk for body lice? Body lice is most common in people who cannot bathe and wash their clothes regularly, especially if they live in crowded conditions. In the United States, this is most often people experiencing homelessness . In other countries, body lice can also affect refugees and victims of war or natural disasters. What are the symptoms of body lice? The most common symptom of body lice is intense itching . There may also be a rash, which is caused by an allergic reaction to the bites. The itching causes some people to scratch until they get sores. Sometimes these sores can become infected with bacteria or fungi . If someone has body lice for a long time, the heavily bitten areas of their skin can become thickened and discolored. This is most common around your midsection (waist, groin, and upper thighs). How do you know if you have body lice? A diagnosis of body lice usually comes from finding nits and crawling lice in the seams of clothing. Sometimes a body louse can be seen crawling or feeding on the skin. Other times it takes a magnifying lens to see the lice or nits. What are the treatments for body lice? The main treatment for body lice is to improve personal hygiene. That means regular showers and washing clothes, bedding, and towels at least once a week. Use hot water to wash the laundry, and dry it using the hot cycle of the dryer. Some people may also need a lice-killing medicine. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Like other parts of the body, bones can get infected. The infections are usually bacterial, but can also be fungal. They may spread to the bone from nearby skin or muscles, or from another part of the body through the bloodstream. People who are at risk for bone infections include those with diabetes , poor circulation, or recent injury to the bone. You may also be at risk if you are having hemodialysis . Symptoms of bone infections include: Pain in the infected area Chills and fever Swelling, warmth, and redness A blood test or imaging test such as an x-ray can tell if you have a bone infection. Treatment includes antibiotics and often surgery.

Botulism is a rare but serious illness. The cause is a toxin (poison) made by a bacterium called Clostridium botulinum. It occurs naturally in soil. There are several kinds of botulism. Foodborne botulism comes from eating foods contaminated with the toxin. Wound botulism happens when a wound infected with the bacteria makes the toxin. It is more common in heroin users. Infant botulism happens when a baby consumes the spores of the bacteria from soil or honey.  All forms can be deadly and are medical emergencies. Symptoms include double or blurred vision, drooping eyelids, slurred speech, difficulty swallowing, dry mouth, and muscle weakness. Treatment may include antitoxins, intensive medical care, or surgery of infected wounds. To prevent botulism: Be very careful when canning foods at home Do not let babies eat honey Get prompt medical care for infected wounds Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Campylobacter infection is a common foodborne illness . You usually get it from eating contaminated food, especially raw or undercooked poultry. You can also get it from drinking contaminated water or raw milk, or handling infected animal feces (poop). Some infected people don't have any symptoms.  If you do have symptoms, they start two to five days after you are infected. They usually last about one week, and can include: Diarrhea (which could be bloody) Cramping Abdominal pain Fever Fatigue Nausea and vomiting Health care providers use stool tests to make a diagnosis. Most people get better without treatment. You should drink extra fluids for as long as the diarrhea lasts. People who have a severe infection or a weakened immune system may need to take antibiotics . In rare cases, the infection can cause reactive arthritis or Guillain-Barre syndrome . To prevent Campylobacter infection, cook poultry thoroughly. Use a separate cutting board and utensils for meats. Make sure to clean them carefully with soap and hot water after you use them. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Cat scratch disease (CSD) is an illness caused by the bacterium Bartonella henselae. Almost half of all cats carry the infection at some point. The infection does not make cats sick. However, the scratch or bite of an infected cat can cause symptoms in people, including : Swollen lymph nodes , especially around the head, neck, and upper limbs Fever Headache Fatigue Poor appetite For people with weak immune systems, CSD may cause more serious problems. The best way to avoid CSD is to avoid rough play with cats that could lead to scratches or bites. If you do get a scratch or bite, wash it well with soap and water. If the bite or scratch gets infected or if you have symptoms of CSD, call your doctor. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is C. diff ? C. diff is a bacterium that can cause diarrhea and more serious intestinal conditions such as colitis. You may see it called other names, such as Clostridioides difficile (the new name), Clostridium difficile (an older name), and C. diff icile. It causes close to half a million illnesses each year. What causes C. diff infections? C. diff bacteria are commonly found in the environment, but people usually only get C. diff infections when they are taking antibiotics . That's because antibiotics not only wipe out bad germs, but they also kill the good germs that protect your body against infections. The effect of antibiotics can last as long as several months. If you come in contact with C. diff germs during this time, you can get sick. You are more likely to get a C. diff infection if you take antibiotics for more than a week. C. diff spreads when people touch food, surfaces, or objects that are contaminated with feces (poop) from a person who has C. diff . Who is more likely to get a C. diff infection? You are at more likely to get a C. diff infection if you: Are taking antibiotics Are 65 or older Recently stayed in a hospital or nursing home Have a weakened immune system Have had a previous infection with C. diff or were exposed to it What are the symptoms of C. diff infections? The symptoms of C. diff infections include: Diarrhea (loose, watery stools) or frequent bowel movements for several days Fever Stomach tenderness or pain Loss of appetite Nausea Severe diarrhea causes you to lose a lot of fluids. This can put you at risk for dehydration . How are C. diff infections diagnosed? If you have been taking antibiotics recently and have symptoms of a C. diff infection, you should see your health care provider. Your provider will ask about your symptoms and do a lab test of your stool . In some cases, you might also need an imaging test such as an x-ray or CT scan to check for complications. What are the treatments for C. diff infections? Certain antibiotics can treat C. diff infections. If you were already taking a different antibiotic when you got C. diff , your provider may ask you to stop taking that one. If you have a severe case, you may need to stay in the hospital. If you have very severe pain or serious complications, you may need surgery to remove the diseased part of your colon. About 1 in 6 people who have had a C. diff infection will get it again within the following 2 to 8 weeks. This is called recurrent C. diff . It could be that your original infection came back or that you have a new infection. Contact your provider if your symptoms come back. For people who keep getting C. diff infections, treatments such as fecal microbiota transplants (FMT) have shown promising results. FMT uses stool (or bacteria from stool) from a healthy donor to try to restore the balance of healthy bacteria in your intestines. Can C. diff infections be prevented? There are steps you can take to try to prevent getting or spreading C. diff : Wash your hands with soap and water after you use the bathroom and before you eat. If you have diarrhea, clean the bathroom that you used before anyone else uses it. Use bleach mixed with water or another disinfectant to clean the toilet seat, handle, and lid. Health care providers can also help prevent C. diff infections by taking infection control precautions and improving how they prescribe antibiotics. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Cellulitis is an infection of the skin and deep underlying tissues. Group A strep ( streptococcal ) bacteria are the most common cause.  The bacteria enter your body when you get an injury such as a bruise, burn, surgical cut, or wound. Symptoms include: Fever and chills Swollen glands or lymph nodes A rash with painful, red, tender skin. The skin may blister and scab over. Your health care provider may take a sample or culture from your skin or do a blood test to identify the bacteria causing infection. Treatment is with antibiotics. They may be oral in mild cases, or intravenous (by IV) for more severe cases.

What is Chagas disease? Chagas disease, or American trypanosomiasis, is an illness that can cause serious heart and stomach problems. It is caused by a parasite . Chagas disease is common in Latin America, especially in poor, rural areas. It can also be found in the United States, most often in people who were infected before they moved to the U.S. What causes Chagas disease? Chagas disease is caused by the Trypanosoma cruzi parasite. It is usually spread by infected blood-sucking bugs called triatomine bugs. They are also known as "kissing bugs" because they often bite people's faces. When one of these bugs bites you, it leaves behind infected waste. You can become infected if you rub the waste in your eyes or nose, the bite wound, or a cut. Chagas disease can also spread through contaminated food, a blood transfusion, a donated organ, or from the pregnant parent to the baby during pregnancy. Who is more likely to develop Chagas disease? Kissing bugs can be found throughout the Americas, but they are more common in certain areas. The people who are most at risk for Chagas disease: Live in rural areas of Latin America Have seen the bugs, especially in those areas Have stayed in a house with a thatched roof or with walls that have cracks or crevices What are the symptoms of Chagas disease? In the beginning, there may be no symptoms. Some people do get mild symptoms, such as: Fever Fatigue Body aches Headache Loss of appetite Diarrhea Vomiting A rash A swollen eyelid These early symptoms usually go away. However, if you don't treat the infection, it stays in your body. Later, it can cause serious intestinal and heart problems such as: An  serious arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat) that can cause sudden death An enlarged heart that doesn't pump blood well Problems with digestion and bowel movements An increased chance of having a stroke How is Chagas disease diagnosed? To find out if you have Chagas disease, your health care provider: Will do a physical exam Will take your medical history, including asking about your symptoms and where you have lived and traveled Will run a blood test for Chagas disease May run tests to see whether the disease has affected your intestines and heart What are the treatments for Chagas disease? Medicines can kill the parasite, especially early on. You can also treat related problems. For example, a pacemaker can help with some heart complications. Can Chagas disease be prevented? There are no vaccines or medicines to prevent Chagas disease. If you travel to areas where it occurs, you are at higher risk if you sleep outdoors or are staying in poor housing conditions. It is important to use insecticides to prevent bites and practice food safety . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Chickenpox is an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus. Most cases are in children under age 15, but older children and adults can get it.  It spreads very easily from one person to another. The classic symptom of chickenpox is an uncomfortable, itchy rash. The rash turns into fluid-filled blisters and eventually into scabs. It usually shows up on the face, chest, and back and then spreads to the rest of the body. Other symptoms include: Fever Headache Tiredness Loss of appetite Chickenpox is usually mild and lasts 5 to 10 days. Calamine lotions and oatmeal baths can help with itching. Acetaminophen can treat the fever. Do not use aspirin for chickenpox; that combination can cause Reye syndrome . Chickenpox can sometimes cause serious problems. Adults, babies, teenagers, pregnant women, and those with weak immune systems tend to get sicker from it. They may need to take antiviral medicines. Once you catch chickenpox, the virus usually stays in your body.  You probably will not get chickenpox again, but the virus can cause shingles in adults. A chickenpox vaccine can help prevent most cases of chickenpox, or make it less severe if you do get it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Chikungunya is a virus that spread by the same kinds of mosquitoes that spread dengue and Zika virus . Rarely, the virus can spread from the pregnant  parent to their newborn around the time of birth. It may also spread through contact with infected blood. There have been outbreaks of chikungunya virus in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Indian and Pacific Oceans, the Caribbean, and Central and South America. Most people who have chikungunya will have symptoms, which can be severe. They usually start 3-7 days after being bitten by an infected mosquito. The most common symptoms are fever and joint pain. Other symptoms may include headache , muscle pain, joint swelling, and rash . Most people feel better within a week. In some cases, however, the joint pain may last for months. People at risk for more severe disease include newborns, older adults, and people with diseases such as high blood pressure , diabetes , or heart disease . A blood test can show whether you have chikungunya virus. There are no medicines to treat it. Drinking lots of fluids, resting, and taking non-aspirin pain relievers might help you feel better. In the U.S., there is a vaccine for adults who are at a higher risk of getting chikungunya. You can also help prevent getting or spreading chikungunya by avoiding mosquito bites : Use a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent when you go outdoors. Make sure to follow the instructions for using the repellant. Wear clothes that cover your arms, legs, and feet. Stay in places that either have air conditioning (with the windows closed) or that use window and door screens. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are vaccines? Vaccines are injections (shots), liquids, pills, or nasal sprays that you take to teach the immune system to recognize and defend against harmful germs. The germs could be viruses or bacteria . Some types of vaccines contain germs that cause disease. But the germs have been killed or weakened enough that they won't make your child sick. Some vaccines only contain a part of a germ. Other types of vaccines include instructions for your cells to make a protein of the germ. These different vaccine types all spark an immune response, which helps the body fight off the germs. Your child's immune system will also remember the germ and attack it if that germ ever invades again. This protection against a certain disease is called immunity. Why do I need to vaccinate my child? Babies are born with immune systems that can fight most germs, but there are some serious diseases they can't handle. That's why they need vaccines to strengthen their immune system. These diseases once killed or harmed many infants, children, and adults. But now with vaccines, your child can get immunity from these diseases without having to get sick. And for a few vaccines, getting vaccinated can actually give you a better immune response than getting the disease would. Vaccinating your child also protects others. Normally, germs can travel quickly through a community and make a lot of people sick. If enough people get sick, it can lead to an outbreak. But when enough people are vaccinated against a certain disease, it's harder for that disease to spread to others. The entire community is less likely to get the disease. This is called "community immunity." Community immunity is especially important for the people who can't get certain vaccines. For example, they may not be able to get a vaccine because they have weakened immune systems. Others may be allergic to certain vaccine ingredients. And newborn babies are too young to get some vaccines. Community immunity can help to protect them all. Are vaccines safe for children? Vaccines are safe . They must go through extensive safety testing and evaluation before they are approved in the United States. Some people worry that childhood vaccines could cause autism spectrum disorder (ASD). But many scientific studies have looked at this and have found no link between vaccines and autism. Can vaccines overload my child's immune system? No, vaccines do not overload the immune system. Every day, a healthy child's immune system successfully fights off thousands of germs. When your child gets vaccines, they are getting weakened or dead germs. So even if they get several vaccines in one day, they are being exposed to a tiny amount of germs compared to what they encounter every day in their environment. When do I need to vaccinate my child? Your child will get vaccines during well-child visits . They will be given according to the vaccine schedule. This schedule lists which vaccines are recommended for children. It includes who should get the vaccines, how many doses they need, and at what age they should get them. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes the vaccine schedule. Following the vaccine schedule allows your child to get protection from the diseases at exactly the right time. It gives their body the chance to build up immunity before being exposed to these very serious diseases.

What is chlamydia? Chlamydia is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI). It is caused by bacteria called Chlamydia trachomatis . Anyone can get chlamydia. It often doesn't cause symptoms, so people may not know that they have it. Antibiotics can cure it. But if it's not treated, chlamydia can cause serious health problems. How is chlamydia spread? You can get chlamydia during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with someone who has chlamydia. A pregnant person can also pass chlamydia to the baby during childbirth . If you've had chlamydia and were treated in the past, you can get re-infected if you have unprotected sex with someone who has it. Who is more likely to get chlamydia? Chlamydia is more common in young people, especially young women. You are more likely to get infected with chlamydia if you don't consistently use a condom or if you have multiple partners. What are the symptoms of chlamydia? Chlamydia doesn't usually cause any symptoms. So you may not realize that you have it. But even if you don't have symptoms, you can still pass the infection to others. If you do have symptoms, they may not appear until several weeks after you have sex with someone who has chlamydia. Symptoms in women include: Abnormal vaginal discharge, which may have a strong smell A burning sensation when urinating If the infection spreads, you might get lower abdominal (belly) pain , pain during sex, nausea , and fever . Symptoms in men include: Discharge from your penis A burning sensation when urinating (peeing) Pain and swelling in one or both testicles (although this is less common) If the chlamydia infects the rectum (in men or women), it can cause rectal pain, discharge, and bleeding. How is chlamydia diagnosed? There are lab tests to diagnose chlamydia. Your health care provider may ask you to provide a urine sample. Or your provider may use (or ask you to use) a cotton swab to get a sample from your vagina to test for chlamydia. Who should be tested for chlamydia? You should go to your provider for a test if you have symptoms of chlamydia or if you have a partner who has an STI. Pregnant people should get a test when they go to their first prenatal visit . People at higher risk should get checked for chlamydia every year: Sexually active women 25 and younger Older women who have new or multiple sex partners or a sex partner who has an STI Men who have sex with men (MSM) What other problems can chlamydia cause? In women, an untreated infection can spread to your uterus and fallopian tubes, causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID can cause permanent damage to your reproductive system. This can lead to long-term pelvic pain , infertility , and ectopic pregnancy . Women who have had chlamydia infections more than once are at higher risk of serious reproductive health complications. Men often don't have health problems from chlamydia. Sometimes it can infect the epididymis (the tube that carries sperm). This can cause pain, fever, and, rarely, infertility . Both men and women can develop reactive arthritis because of a chlamydia infection. Reactive arthritis is a type of arthritis that happens as a "reaction" to an infection in the body. Babies born to infected mothers can get eye infections and pneumonia from chlamydia. It may also make it more likely for your baby to be born too early . Untreated chlamydia may also increase your chances of getting or giving HIV . What are the treatments for chlamydia? Antibiotics will cure the infection. You may get a one-time dose of the antibiotics, or you may need to take medicine every day for 7 days. It is important to take all the medicine that your provider prescribed for you. Antibiotics cannot repair any permanent damage that the disease has caused. To prevent spreading the disease to your partner, you should not have sex until the infection has cleared up. If you got a one-time dose of antibiotics, you should wait 7 days after taking the medicine to have sex again. If you have to take medicine every day for 7 days, you should not have sex again until you have finished taking all of the doses of your medicine. It is common to get a repeat infection, so you need to get tested again about three months after treatment. Can chlamydia be prevented? The only sure way to prevent chlamydia is to not have vaginal, anal, or oral sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading chlamydia. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Cholera is a bacterial infection that causes diarrhea . The cholera bacterium is usually found in water or food that has been contaminated by feces (poop). Cholera is rare in the US. You may get it if you travel to parts of the world with poor water and sewage treatment. Outbreaks can also happen after disasters. The disease is not likely to spread directly from person to person. Cholera infections are often mild. Some people don't have any symptoms. If you do get symptoms, they usually start 2 to 3 days after infection. The most common symptom is watery diarrhea. In some cases, the infection can be severe, causing  lots of watery diarrhea, vomiting, and leg cramps. Because you quickly lose body fluids, you are at risk for dehydration and shock . Without treatment, you could die within hours. If you think that you might have cholera, you should get medical care right away. Doctors diagnose cholera with a stool sample or rectal swab. Treatment is the replacement of the fluid and salts that you lost through the diarrhea. This is usually with a rehydration solution that you drink. People with severe cases may need an I.V. to replace the fluids. Some of them may also need antibiotics . Most people who get fluid replacement right away will recover. There are vaccines to prevent cholera. One of them is available for adults in the U.S. Very few Americans need it, because most people do not visit areas that have an active cholera outbreak. There are also simple steps you can take to help to prevent cholera infection: Use only bottled or purified water for drinking, washing dishes, making ice cubes, and brushing your teeth If you do use tap water, boil it or use iodine tablets Wash your hands often with soap and clean water Make sure that the cooked food you eat is fully cooked and served hot Avoid unwashed or unpeeled raw fruits and vegetables Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is chronic bronchitis? Chronic bronchitis is a type of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). COPD is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. The other main type of COPD is emphysema . Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. Chronic bronchitis is inflammation (swelling) and irritation of the bronchial tubes. These tubes are the airways that carry air to and from the air sacs in your lungs. The irritation of the tubes causes mucus to build up. This mucus and the swelling of the tubes make it harder for your lungs to move oxygen in and carbon dioxide out of your body. What causes chronic bronchitis? The cause of chronic bronchitis is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause chronic bronchitis, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to chronic bronchitis. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing chronic bronchitis. Who is at risk for chronic bronchitis? The risk factors for chronic bronchitis include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have chronic bronchitis smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace. Age. Most people who have chronic bronchitis are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get chronic bronchitis are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. What are the symptoms of chronic bronchitis? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or a cough that produces a lot mucus Wheezing A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity Tightness in your chest Some people with chronic bronchitis get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, chronic bronchitis can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is chronic bronchitis diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Various tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests What are the treatments for chronic bronchitis? There is no cure for chronic bronchitis. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat chronic bronchitis. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with chronic bronchitis are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases. Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe chronic bronchitis and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling A lung transplant , as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines If you have chronic bronchitis, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can chronic bronchitis be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of chronic bronchitis, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Where are germs found? Germs are a part of everyday life. Some of them are helpful, but others are harmful and cause disease. They can be found everywhere - in our air, soil, and water. They are on our skin and in our bodies. Germs are also on the surfaces and objects that we touch. Sometimes those germs can spread to you and make you sick. For example, there could be germs on a tv remote. You could get infected with the germs if you touch the remote and then rub your eyes or nose or eat with your hands. How can I avoid getting germs from surfaces and objects? To avoid becoming infected by germs from surfaces and objects, it is important to wash your hands often . But you can't wash your hands every time you touch something. So it's also important to regularly clean and disinfect surfaces and objects. What is the difference between cleaning, sanitizing, and disinfecting? Some people think that disinfecting is same thing as cleaning or sanitizing. But they are actually different: Cleaning removes dirt, dust, crumbs, and germs from surfaces or objects. When you clean, you will likely use soap (or detergent) and water to physically clean off the surfaces and objects. This may not necessarily kill the germs. But since you removed some of them, there are fewer germs that could spread infection to you. Disinfecting uses chemicals (disinfectants) to kill germs on surfaces and objects. Some common disinfectants are bleach and alcohol solutions. You usually need to leave the disinfectant on the surfaces and objects for a certain period of time to kill the germs. Disinfecting does not necessarily clean dirty surfaces or remove germs. Sanitizing could be done by either cleaning, disinfecting, or both. Sanitizing means that you are lowering the number of germs to a safe level. What is considered a safe level depends on public health standards or requirements at a workplace, school, etc. For example, there are sanitizing procedures for restaurants and other facilities that prepare food. What you do to sanitize will vary, depending on your needs. You might be mopping a floor using a mop, a chemical, and water. You might use a dishwasher to sanitize the dishes. Or you could be using an antibacterial wipe on a tv remote. If you both clean and disinfect a surface or object, you can further lower the risk of spreading infection. There are products that clean and disinfect at the same time. Which surfaces and objects do I need to clean and disinfect? To prevent the spread of infection, you should regularly clean and disinfect surfaces and objects that are touched often. For example, in your house, this would include countertops, doorknobs, faucet and toilet handles, light switches, remotes, and toys. How can I safely clean and disinfect? It's important to be safe when using cleaning and disinfecting products: Store them in the containers they came in. Always follow the instructions and pay attention to the warnings on the label. Do not mix cleaners and disinfectants unless the labels say that it is safe to do so. Combining certain products (such as chlorine bleach and ammonia cleaners) can cause serious injury or even death. Check the label to see whether you need to use gloves to protect your hands and/or eye protection when using the products If you swallow, inhale, or get them on your skin , follow the directions on the label or get medical help Store them out of the reach of children

Cold sores are caused by a contagious virus called herpes simplex virus (HSV). There are two types of HSV. Type 1 usually causes oral herpes, or cold sores. Type 1 herpes virus infects more than half of the U.S. population by the time they reach their 20s. Type 2 usually affects the genital area . Some people have no symptoms from the infection. But others develop painful and unsightly cold sores. Cold sores usually occur outside the mouth, on or around the lips. When they are inside the mouth, they are usually on the gums or the roof of the mouth. They are not the same as canker sores , which are not contagious. There is no cure for cold sores. They normally go away on their own in a few weeks.  Antiviral medicines can help them heal faster.  They can also help to prevent cold sores in people who often get them. Other medicines can help with the pain and discomfort of the sores. These include ointments that numb the blisters, soften the crusts of the sores, or dry them out. Protecting your lips from the sun with sunblock lip balm can also help.

What is the common cold? The common cold is a mild infection of your upper respiratory tract (which includes your nose and throat). Colds are probably the most common illness. Adults have an average of 2-3 colds per year, and children have even more. Colds are more common in the winter and spring, but you can get them at any time. What causes the common cold? More than 200 different viruses can cause a cold, but rhinoviruses are the most common type. The viruses that cause colds are very contagious. They can spread from person to person through the air and close personal contact. You can also get infected when you touch something that has the virus on it and then touch your eyes, mouth, or nose. For example, you could get a cold after you shake hands with someone who has a cold or touch a doorknob that has the germs on it, and then touch your face. What are the symptoms of the common cold? The symptoms of a common cold usually include: Sneezing Stuffy nose (congestion) Runny nose Sore throat Coughing Headache The symptoms usually start a few days after you become infected with the virus. Some symptoms can last for 10-14 days. What are the treatments for the common cold? There is no cure for the common cold. But there are treatments that can make you feel better while you wait for the cold to go away on its own: Getting lots of rest. Drinking plenty of fluids. Using a clean humidifier or cool mist vaporizer. Gargling with warm salt water. Using saline nose drops or sprays. Taking over-the-counter pain or cold and cough medicines . But you need to be careful with certain medicines: Children and teens should not take aspirin. Some cold and cough medicines contain ingredients that are not recommended for children. Talk with your child's health care provider before giving your child any cold and cough medicines. Some cold and cough medicines contain pain relievers. If you also take a separate pain reliever with these medicines, you could be getting a dangerous amount of the pain reliever. Read the labels on the medicines and follow the instructions carefully. If you have questions, ask your provider or a pharmacist. Antibiotics will not help with a cold. Antibiotics help with bacterial infections, not with viral infections such as colds. Most people who have a cold will feel better after a week or two. However, some people who get a cold may develop other illnesses, such as bronchitis or pneumonia . This is more common in people with weakened immune systems, asthma , or other respiratory conditions. Contact your provider if you or your child have symptoms that concern you, such as: Trouble breathing or fast breathing Dehydration Fever that lasts longer than 4 days Symptoms that last more than 10 days without improvement Symptoms, such as fever or cough, that improve but then return or worsen Worsening of chronic medical conditions Can the common cold be prevented? There is no vaccine to protect against the common cold. But you may be able to reduce your risk of getting or spreading a cold by: Washing your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. Avoiding touching your face, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. Avoiding close contact, such as kissing, shaking hands, and sharing cups and eating utensils, with others if you are sick or they are sick. Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch. Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue. Then throw away the tissue and wash your hands. Staying home when sick. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is an illness caused by a virus. This virus is a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2. It spreads when a person who has the infection breathes out droplets and very small particles that contain the virus. On this page, you'll find links to resources on important issues such as symptoms, risks, and how you can protect yourself and your family. We also have pages on: COVID-19 testing COVID-19 vaccines Post-COVID conditions (long COVID)

COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is an illness caused by a virus. This virus is a coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2. In the United States, there are several vaccines that are effective at protecting people from getting seriously ill, being hospitalized, and dying from COVID-19. These vaccines are being used under Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This means that the vaccines have met the FDA's scientific standards for safety , effectiveness, and manufacturing quality that are needed to support authorization. This page includes details about the vaccines and the vaccination program, including where you can find a vaccine . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is cryptosporidiosis? Cryptosporidiosis is a contagious disease that causes watery diarrhea . It is caused by parasites called Cryptosporidium, or Crypto . These parasites live in soil, food, and water. They are found in every region of the United States and throughout the world. Crypto can also be found on surfaces or dirty hands that have been contaminated with the stool (poop) of humans or animals that have the infection. How is cryptosporidiosis spread? You can become infected with Crypto by swallowing the parasite if it is in your food, drinking water, or water that you swim in. You can also get infected when you touch something that has been contaminated, and then you touch your eyes, mouth, or nose. Another way that Crypto can spread is through sexual contact. Who is more likely to get cryptosporidiosis? Certain people are more likely to get Crypto; they include: Children and workers at childcare centers Older adults (ages 75 years and older) People who take care of other people with Crypto International travelers Backpackers, hikers, and campers who drink unfiltered, untreated water People, including swimmers, who swallow water from contaminated sources People who touch infected animals, often cows or sheep What are the symptoms of cryptosporidiosis? The most common symptom of cryptosporidiosis is watery diarrhea. Other symptoms include: Dehydration Weight loss Stomach cramps or pain Fever Nausea and vomiting The symptoms generally begin 2 to 10 days after becoming infected with the parasite. In people with healthy immune systems , the symptoms can last about 1 to 2 weeks. Occasionally, the symptoms can last longer or come and go for up to 30 days. People with weakened immune systems may develop a serious, chronic illness. Some reasons why you might have a weakened immune system could include: Having HIV Having cancer Having a genetic condition that affects the immune system Taking certain medicines, such as chemotherapy and medicines needed after an organ transplant Some people may not have any symptoms at all. Contact your health care provider if you have watery diarrhea that lasts more than a few days, especially if you have a weakened immune system. How is cryptosporidiosis diagnosed? Cryptosporidiosis is diagnosed by examining stool samples, usually under a microscope. People with Crypto can have many parasites in their stool one day but not as many the next day. So you may need to give the lab three stool samples collected on three different days. This helps make sure that your diagnosis is correct. What are the treatments for cryptosporidiosis? Most people with cryptosporidiosis get better without treatment. It usually takes about one to two weeks.  It's important to drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration. Infants, young children, and pregnant people are more likely to get dehydration. They should get extra fluids. If you are pregnant or if you think that you or your child are severely dehydrated, contact your provider about how to get enough fluids. Some people who are dehydrated may need to get intravenous (IV) fluids in a hospital. Over-the-counter anti-diarrheal medicine might help slow down diarrhea, but do not take it without first asking your provider. There is a medicine to treat diarrhea caused by Crypto in people with healthy immune systems. You and your provider can talk about whether that medicine is right for you. Can cryptosporidiosis be prevented? To lower your chance of getting or spreading Crypto: Wash your hands often with soap and water, especially after using the toilet, changing diapers, or touching animals. You also need to wash your hands before eating or preparing food. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers are not effective against Crypto. Only drink water that you know is safe. Only drink milk and apple cider that have been pasteurized. Don't eat uncooked foods when traveling in countries where the food supply might be unsafe. Never go swimming when you have diarrhea. Don't swallow water when you go swimming. Use condoms or dental dams every time you have sex. This will also help prevent other sexually transmitted infections . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a virus found around the world. It is related to the viruses that cause chickenpox and infectious mononucleosis (mono). Between 50% and 80% of adults in the United States have had a CMV infection by age 40. Once CMV is in a person's body, it stays there for life. CMV is spread through close contact with body fluids. Most people with CMV don't get sick and don't know that they've been infected. But infection with the virus can be serious in babies and people with weak immune systems. If a woman gets CMV when she is pregnant, she can pass it on to her baby. Usually the babies do not have health problems. But some babies can develop lifelong disabilities. A blood test can tell whether a person has ever been infected with CMV. Most people with CMV don't need treatment. If you have a weakened immune system, your doctor may prescribe antiviral medicine. Good hygiene, including proper hand washing, may help prevent infections. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is dengue? Dengue is a viral infection . It can be caused by four related viruses. You can get it if an infected mosquito bites you. It is common in warm, wet areas of the world. Although rare, it can be found in some parts of the United States. Outbreaks are more common during rainy seasons. How does dengue spread? Dengue spreads to people through the bite of an infected mosquito. It does not spread directly from person to person. However, a pregnant person can pass the infection on to the baby. In rare cases, it can spread through a blood transfusion , organ transplant , or needle stick injury (an accidental injury from a used needle).. What are the symptoms of dengue and severe dengue? About one in four people infected with dengue will get sick. For those who do get sick, the infection can be mild or severe. The symptoms of dengue include: A high fever Nausea and vomiting Rash Aches and pains (eye pain, usually behind the eyes, and pain in the muscles, joints, or bones) The symptoms usually last two to seven days. Severe dengue is a serious form of the illness. About 1 in 20 people who get sick with dengue will develop severe dengue. It can cause shock , internal bleeding, and even death. People are more likely to develop severe dengue if they have had dengue before, are pregnant, or are infants. Watch for signs and symptoms of severe dengue. Warning signs usually begin about 24 - 48 hours after your fever has gone away. If you or your family member have these signs, get immediate medical care: Severe abdominal (belly) pain and tenderness Vomiting at least 3 times in 24 hours Bleeding from the nose or gums Vomiting blood, or blood in the stool (poop) Feeling tired, restless, or irritable How is dengue diagnosed? There is a blood test which can show if you have been infected with dengue. What are the treatments for dengue? There is no specific medicine to treat dengue. Most people will get better after about a week. But if you think you might have dengue: See a health care provider and mention any recent travel. Rest as much as possible. Take acetaminophen to control fever and relieve pain. But do not take aspirin or ibuprofen. Drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration . Severe dengue often requires care at a hospital. Can dengue be prevented? In the United States, a dengue vaccine is approved for children who are ages 9 - 16. They must also have previously had dengue and live in areas where dengue is common. You can also help prevent dengue by avoiding mosquito bites: Wear insect repellent with DEET or another U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. Make sure to follow the instructions for using the repellant. Wear clothes that cover your arms, legs and feet. Close unscreened doors and windows. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Diphtheria is a serious bacterial infection. You can catch it from a person who has the infection and coughs or sneezes. You can also get infected by coming in contact with an object, such as a toy, that has bacteria on it. Diphtheria usually affects the nose and throat. Symptoms include: Sore throat Swollen glands in the neck Fever Weakness Your doctor will diagnose it based on your signs and symptoms and a lab test. Getting treatment for diphtheria quickly is important. If your doctor suspects that you have it, you'll start treatment before the lab tests come back. Treatment is with antibiotics. The diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus vaccine can prevent diphtheria, but its protection does not last forever.  Children need another dose, or booster, at about age 12.  Then, as adults, they should get a booster every 10 years. Diphtheria is very rare in the United States because of the vaccine. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is Ebola? Ebola, also known as Ebola virus disease (EVD), is a type of hemorrhagic fever . It is a rare and often deadly disease. It can be caused by several different types of Ebola viruses. There are occasional outbreaks of Ebola, and they mostly occur in Africa. How does Ebola spread? Researchers believe that the virus first spreads from an infected animal to a human. Ebola can then spread from human to human through direct contact with: Blood or body fluids of a person who is sick with or has died from Ebola. Objects (such as clothes, bedding, needles, and medical equipment) contaminated with body fluids from a person who is sick with or has died from Ebola. Semen (through oral, vaginal, or anal sex) from a man who has recovered from Ebola. The virus can remain in semen and other body fluids, even if the person no longer has symptoms. When people become infected with Ebola, they do not start developing signs or symptoms right away. They cannot spread Ebola to others until after they develop symptoms. What are the symptoms of Ebola? The symptoms of Ebola may appear anywhere from 2 to 21 days after exposure to the virus. The average is about 8 to 10 days. The symptoms usually include: Fever Headache Joint and muscle aches Weakness and fatigue Sore throat Gastrointestinal symptoms including abdominal (belly) pain , diarrhea , and vomiting Loss of appetite Unexplained bleeding or bruising Other symptoms may include a rash , red eyes, and hiccups. How is Ebola diagnosed? The early symptoms of Ebola are similar to other more common diseases. This makes it difficult to diagnose Ebola in someone who has been infected for only a few days. If a person has the symptoms of Ebola and may have been exposed to the virus, the health care provider can do a blood test for Ebola. It can take a few days after the symptoms start before Ebola shows up in the blood test. What are the treatments for Ebola? In the United States, there are two approved medicines to treat Ebola that is caused by one specific type of virus ( Zaire ebolavirus ). These medicines have not been evaluated to treat Ebola caused by other types of Ebola viruses. The medicines are monoclonal antibodies, which are immune system proteins that are created in the lab. Whether or not there are medicines to treat a case of Ebola, there is supportive care. This type of care can improve the chances of survival, especially when given early. Supportive care includes: Giving fluids and electrolytes Giving medicines to support blood pressure, reduce vomiting and diarrhea, and to manage fever and pain Giving oxygen Treating any other complications or infections People who recover may still have side effects afterwards, such as fatigue, muscle aches, eye and vision problems , and stomach pain. Can Ebola be prevented? In the United States, there is one vaccine that has been approved to prevent Ebola caused by one specific type of Ebola virus ( Zaire ebolavirus ). It may be given to health care providers who will be or may be treating Ebola patients and people who work with live Ebola virus in labs. If you live in or plan to travel to a region where Ebola virus may be present, you can help protect yourself by avoiding contact with: Blood and body fluids of people who are sick Semen from a man who has recovered from Ebola, until testing shows that the virus is gone from his semen Items that could be contaminated with blood or body fluids from someone who has Ebola Bats, forest antelopes, and nonhuman primates (such as monkeys and chimpanzees), including their blood, fluids, or meat Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

E. coli is the name of a type of bacteria that lives in your intestines. Most types of E. coli are harmless. However, some types can make you sick and cause diarrhea . One type causes travelers' diarrhea. The worst type of E. coli causes bloody diarrhea, and can sometimes cause kidney failure and even death. These problems are most likely to occur in children and in adults with weak immune systems. You can get E. coli infections by eating foods containing the bacteria. Symptoms of infection include: Nausea or vomiting Severe abdominal cramps Watery or very bloody diarrhea Fatigue Fever To help avoid food poisoning and prevent infection, handle food safely . Cook meat well, wash fruits and vegetables before eating or cooking them, and avoid unpasteurized milk and juices. You can also get the infection by swallowing water in a swimming pool contaminated with human waste. Most cases of E. coli infection get better without treatment in 5 to 10 days.

A fever is a body temperature that is higher than normal. A normal temperature can vary from person to person, but it is usually around 98.6 F (37 C). A fever is not a disease. It is usually a sign that your body is trying to fight an illness or infection. Infections cause most fevers. You get a fever because your body is trying to kill the virus or bacteria that caused the infection. Most of those bacteria and viruses do well when your body is at your normal temperature. But if you have a fever, it is harder for them to survive. Fever also activates your body's immune system. Other causes of fevers include: Medicines, including some antibiotics , blood pressure medicines , and anti-seizure medicines Heat illness Cancers Autoimmune diseases Some childhood vaccines Treatment depends on the cause of your fever. If the fever is very high, your health care provider may recommend taking an over-the-counter medicine such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Adults can also take aspirin, but children with fevers should not take aspirin. It is also important to drink enough liquids, to prevent dehydration .

What is fifth disease? Fifth disease, also called erythema infectiosum, is a viral infection caused by parvovirus B19. This virus only infects people; it's not the same type of parvovirus that dogs and cats can get. Fifth disease mostly affects children. It often causes a bright red rash on their cheeks (sometimes called a "slapped cheek" rash). In the United States, parvovirus B19 infections are more common in late winter, spring, and early summer. There are usually minor outbreaks of fifth disease about every 3 to 4 years. What causes fifth disease? Parvovirus B19, which causes fifth disease, can spread from person to person: Through respiratory droplets, such as saliva (spit), sputum, or nasal mucus. The droplets can spread when: Someone who has the virus coughs and sneezes You touch an item that has the virus on it Through blood or blood products From a pregnant parent to the baby during pregnancy You are most contagious early in your infection, when you usually only have a fever or cold-like symptoms. You are not likely to be contagious after you get later symptoms such as a rash and joint pain. What are the symptoms of fifth disease? About 2 out of 10 people who get a B19 parvovirus infection will have no symptoms. But most people will get the symptoms of fifth disease, which are usually mild and can include: Fever Headache Cough Sore throat Rashes Joint pain The "slapped cheek" rash is more common in children. They usually get the rash a few days after they first have other symptoms. The rash can then spread to the arms, legs, chest, back, and buttocks. Adults who get fifth disease might also have joint pain and swelling (called polyarthropathy syndrome). Sometimes the infection can cause serious health complications affecting the nerves, joints, or blood system. This is more likely to happen if you are pregnant, have a blood disorder such as anemia , or a weakened immune system . Because of these risks to you and some possible risks to your baby, contact your health care provider if you are pregnant and: You show signs of fifth disease (or a "slapped cheek" rash) You may have been exposed to someone who has the infection How is fifth disease diagnosed? There is no routine lab test to diagnose fifth disease. Providers can often diagnose fifth disease just by seeing the "slapped cheek" rash and rashes on the body. There is testing to show whether or not you have protection (immunity) against the B19 parvovirus or if you have had a recent infection. This test is usually not needed, but your provider may order the test if you are pregnant or at higher risk for complications of the disease. What are the treatments for fifth disease? There is no specific treatment for fifth disease. It is usually mild and goes away on its own. To feel better, get plenty of rest. Taking acetaminophen can help with the fever and pain. Do not give aspirin to children, because it may cause Reye syndrome . This is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. Can fifth disease be prevented? There is no vaccine to prevent fifth disease. But you can help protect yourself and others by: Washing your hands often with soap and water Covering your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze Avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Staying home when you are sick Most people become immune to the virus after having it once. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is the flu? The flu, also called influenza, is a respiratory infection caused by viruses. Each year, millions of Americans get sick with the flu. Sometimes it causes mild illness. But it can also be serious or even deadly, especially for people over 65, newborn babies, and people with certain chronic illnesses. What causes the flu? The flu is caused by flu viruses that spread from person to person. When someone with the flu coughs, sneezes, or talks, they spray tiny droplets. These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby. Less often, a person may get flu by touching a surface or object that has flu virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes. What are the symptoms of the flu? Symptoms of the flu come on suddenly and may include: Fever or feeling feverish/chills Cough Sore throat Runny or stuffy nose Muscle or body aches Headaches Fatigue (tiredness) Some people may also have vomiting and diarrhea . This is more common in children. Sometimes people have trouble figuring out whether they have a cold or the flu. There are differences between them: Signs and Symptoms Cold Flu Start of symptoms Slowly Suddenly Fever Rarely Usually Aches Sometimes (slight) Usually Fatigue, weakness Sometimes Usually Headache Rarely Common Stuffy nose, sneezing, or sore throat Common Sometimes Sometimes people say that they have a "flu" when they really have something else. For example, "stomach flu" isn't the flu; it's gastroenteritis . What other problems can the flu cause? Some people who get the flu will develop complications. Some of these complications can be serious or even life-threatening. They include: Bronchitis Ear infection Sinus infection Pneumonia Inflammation of the heart (myocarditis), brain ( encephalitis ), or muscle tissues ( myositis , rhabdomyolysis) The flu also can make chronic health problems worse. For example, people with asthma may have asthma attacks while they have flu. Certain people are more likely to have complications from the flu, including: Adults 65 and older Pregnant women Children younger than 5 People with certain chronic health conditions, such as asthma, diabetes, and heart disease How is the flu diagnosed? To diagnose the flu, health care providers will first do a medical history and ask about your symptoms. There are several tests for the flu . For the tests, your provider will swipe the inside of your nose or the back of your throat with a swab. Then the swab will be tested for the flu virus. Some tests are quick and give results in 15-20 minutes. But these tests are not as accurate as other flu tests. These other tests can give you the results in one hour or several hours. What are the treatments for the flu? Most people with the flu recover on their own without medical care. People with mild cases of the flu should stay home and avoid contact with others, except to get medical care. But if you have symptoms of flu and are in a high risk group or are very sick or worried about your illness, contact your health care provider. You might need antiviral medicines to treat your flu. Antiviral medicines can make the illness milder and shorten the time you are sick. They also can prevent serious flu complications. They usually work best when you start taking them within 2 days of getting sick. Can the flu be prevented? The best way to prevent the flu is to get a flu vaccine every year. But it's also important to have good health habits like covering your cough and washing your hands often. This can help stop the spread of germs and prevent the flu. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

If you have ever had athlete's foot or a yeast infection , you can blame a fungus. A fungus is a primitive organism. Mushrooms, mold and mildew are examples. Fungi live in air, in soil, on plants and in water. Some live in the human body. Only about half of all types of fungi are harmful. Some fungi reproduce through tiny spores in the air. You can inhale the spores or they can land on you. As a result, fungal infections often start in the lungs or on the skin. You are more likely to get a fungal infection if you have a weakened immune system or take antibiotics. Fungi can be difficult to kill. For skin and nail infections, you can apply medicine directly to the infected area. Oral antifungal medicines are also available for serious infections.

What is gastroenteritis? Gastroenteritis is an inflammation of the lining of the stomach and intestines. The main symptoms include vomiting and diarrhea . It is usually not serious in healthy people, but it can sometimes lead to dehydration or cause severe symptoms. What causes gastroenteritis? There can be many different causes of gastroenteritis: Viruses Bacteria Parasites Chemicals Reactions to certain medicines and food Viral gastroenteritis is the most common type. It can be caused by many different viruses, including noroviruses and rotaviruses . Some people call viral gastroenteritis the "stomach flu." But this name is not medically correct. It is not caused by flu viruses. The flu is a respiratory infection that affects your nose, throat and lungs. When gastroenteritis is caused by consuming foods or drinks contaminated with viruses, bacteria, parasites, or chemicals, this is called food poisoning . The viruses, bacteria, and parasites that cause gastroenteritis can also spread from person to person. You could be infected when you touch something that has the germs on it and then touch your eyes, mouth, or nose. What are the symptoms of gastroenteritis? The symptoms of gastroenteritis include: Diarrhea Pain or cramping in your abdomen (belly) Nausea Vomiting Sometimes fever Gastroenteritis is usually not serious. But it can sometimes cause lead to dehydration or cause severe symptoms. Certain people are at higher risk for these problems. They include: Pregnant women Older adults People with weakened immune systems or other serious health conditions Infants Babies who were born prematurely or have other health conditions If you or a family member are at higher risk and have symptoms of gastroenteritis, contact a health care provider right away.
Even if you are not at high risk, it is possible to become dehydrated or have more serious symptoms. There are some warning signs to watch for. It's important to contact a provider right away if you or your child have any of them: For adults, they include: Change in mental state, such as irritability or lack of energy Diarrhea lasting more than 2 days High fever Vomiting often Six or more loose stools in a day Severe pain in the abdomen (belly) or rectum Stools that are black and tarry or contain blood or pus Symptoms of dehydration, such as thirst, dry mouth , headache, dark-colored urine, and urinating less than normal For infants and children, they include: Change in the child's mental state, such as irritability or lack of energy Diarrhea lasting more than a day Any fever in infants High fever in older children Frequent loose stools Vomiting often Severe pain in the abdomen (belly) or rectum Signs or symptoms of dehydration, such as thirst, dry mouth, urinating less than usual or no wet diapers for 3 hours or more, and no tears when crying Stools that are black and tarry or contain blood or pus How is gastroenteritis diagnosed? To find out if you have gastroenteritis, your provider: Will do a physical exam Will ask about your symptoms May do tests of your stool What are the treatments for gastroenteritis? Usually, people with gastroenteritis get better on their own, with rest and plenty of fluids and electrolytes . Your provider may suggest that you take a probiotic. Studies suggest that some probiotics may help shorten a case of diarrhea. People with more severe symptoms may need medicines to control nausea or vomiting. Providers may also give other medicines for certain types of gastroenteritis, such as antibiotics for some bacterial types and antiparasitic medicines for some parasitic types. Can gastroenteritis be prevented? Gastroenteritis cannot always be prevented. But proper hand washing , cleaning surfaces that may be infected with germs, and safe food preparation may help prevent some of the infections that can cause gastroenteritis. There are vaccines for infants to protect against rotavirus infections. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). It can cause sores on your genital or rectal area, buttocks, and thighs.  You can get it from having vaginal, anal, or oral sex with someone who has it. The virus can spread even when sores are not present. Mothers can also infect their babies during childbirth. Symptoms of herpes are called outbreaks.  You usually get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. The sores are blisters which break and become painful, and then heal. Sometimes people do not know they have herpes because they have no symptoms or very mild symptoms. The virus can be more serious in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems. Repeat outbreaks are common, especially during the first year. Over time, you get them less often and the symptoms become milder.  The virus stays in your body for life. There are tests that can diagnose genital herpes. There is no cure.  However, medicines can help lessen symptoms, decrease outbreaks, and lower the risk of passing the virus to others. Correct usage of latex condoms can reduce, but not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading herpes. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex.

Genital warts are a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV). The warts usually appear as a small bump or group of bumps in the genital area. They are flesh-colored and can be flat or look bumpy like cauliflower. Some genital warts are so small you cannot see them. In women, the warts usually occur in or around the vagina, on the cervix, or around the anus. In men, genital warts are less common. They may have warts on the tip of the penis, around the anus, or on the scrotum, thigh, or groin. You can get genital warts during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with an infected partner.  Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. HPV vaccines may help prevent some of the HPV infections that cause genital warts. Your health care provider usually diagnoses genital warts by seeing them. The warts might disappear on their own. If not, your health care provider can treat or remove them. HPV stays in your body even after treatment, so warts can come back. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What are germs? Germs are microorganisms. This means that they can be seen only through a microscope. They can be found everywhere - in the air, soil, and water. There are also germs on your skin and in your body. Many germs live in and on our bodies without causing harm. Some even help us to stay healthy. But some germs can make you sick. Infectious diseases are diseases that are caused by germs. The main types of germs are bacteria , viruses , fungi , and parasites . How do germs spread? There are different ways that germs can spread, including: Through touching a person who has the germs or making other close contact with them, such as kissing, hugging, or sharing cups or eating utensils Through breathing air after a person with the germs coughs or sneezes Through touching the feces (poop) of someone who has the germs, such as changing diapers, then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth Through touching objects and surfaces that have germs on them, then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth From mother to baby during pregnancy and/or childbirth From insect or animal bites From contaminated food , water , soil, or plants How can I protect myself and others from germs? You can help protect yourself and others from germs: When you have to cough or sneeze, cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or use the inside of your elbow Wash your hands well and often. You should scrub them for at least 20 seconds. It is important to do this when you are most likely to get and spread germs: Before, during, and after preparing food Before eating food Before and after caring for someone at home who is sick with vomiting or diarrhea Before and after treating a cut or wound After using the toilet After changing diapers or cleaning up a child who has used the toilet After blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing After touching an animal, animal feed, or animal waste After handling pet food or pet treats After touching garbage If soap and water are not available, you can use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol Stay home if you are sick Avoid close contact with people who are sick Practice food safety when handling, cooking, and storing food Regularly clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and objects

Giardiasis is an illness caused by a parasite called Giardia intestinalis. It lives in soil, food, and water. It may also be on surfaces that have been contaminated with waste. You can become infected if you swallow the parasite. You can also get it if you're exposed to human feces (poop) through sexual contact. The risk of getting giardia is higher for travelers to countries where it is common, people in child care settings, and those who drink untreated water. Diarrhea is the main symptom of giardia infection. Others include: Passing gas Greasy stools Stomach cramps Upset stomach or nausea These symptoms may lead to weight loss and loss of body fluids. Some people have no symptoms at all. Symptoms of infection often last two to six weeks. Stool sample tests can diagnose it. You often need to collect several samples to test. Doctors use several drugs to treat it. The best way to prevent giardia infection is to practice good hygiene, including frequent hand washing. You should not drink water that may be contaminated. You should also peel or wash fresh fruit and vegetables before eating. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection (STI).  It is most common in young adults. The bacteria that cause gonorrhea can infect the genital tract, mouth, or anus. You can get gonorrhea during vaginal, oral, or anal sex with an infected partner.   A pregnant woman can pass it to her baby during childbirth. Gonorrhea does not always cause symptoms. In men, gonorrhea can cause pain when urinating and discharge from the penis. If untreated, it can cause problems with the prostate and testicles. In women, the early symptoms of gonorrhea often are mild. Later, it can cause bleeding between periods, pain when urinating, and increased discharge from the vagina. If untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease , which causes problems with pregnancy and infertility. Your health care provider will diagnose gonorrhea with lab tests. Treatment is with antibiotics. Treating gonorrhea is becoming more difficult because drug-resistant strains are increasing. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading gonorrhea. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Swine flu is an infection caused by a virus. It's named for a virus that pigs can get. People do not normally get swine flu, but human infections can and do happen.  In 2009 a strain of swine flu called H1N1 infected many people around the world. The virus is contagious and can spread from human to human.   Symptoms of swine flu in people are similar to the symptoms of regular human flu and include fever, cough, sore throat, body aches, headache, chills and fatigue. There are antiviral medicines you can take to prevent or treat swine flu. There is a vaccine available to protect against swine flu. You can help prevent the spread of germs that cause respiratory illnesses like influenza by: Covering your nose and mouth with a tissue when you cough or sneeze. Throw the tissue in the trash after you use it. Washing your hands often with soap and water, especially after you cough or sneeze. You can also use alcohol-based hand cleaners. Avoiding touching your eyes, nose or mouth. Germs spread this way. Trying to avoid close contact with sick people. Staying home from work or school if you are sick. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Haemophilus is the name of a group of bacteria. There are several types of Haemophilus. They can cause different types of illnesses involving breathing, bones and joints, and the nervous system. One common type, Hib (Haemophilus influenzae type b), causes serious disease. It usually strikes children under 5 years old. Your child can get Hib disease by being around other children or adults who may have the bacteria and not know it. The germs spread from person to person. If the germs stay in the child's nose and throat, the child probably will not get sick. But sometimes the germs spread into the lungs or the bloodstream, and then Hib can cause serious problems such as meningitis and pneumonia . Treatment is with antibiotics. There is a vaccine to prevent Hib disease. All children younger than 5 years of age should be vaccinated with the Hib vaccine. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a rare but deadly viral infection. It is spread by mice and rats. They shed the virus in their urine, droppings, and saliva. Tiny droplets with the virus can enter the air. People can get the disease if they breathe infected air or come into contact with rodents or their urine or droppings. You cannot catch it from people. Early symptoms of HPS include: Fatigue Fever Muscle aches, especially in the thighs, hips and back Headaches Chills Dizziness Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or abdominal pain Later symptoms include coughing and shortness of breath. Controlling rodents in and around your house is the best way to prevent infection. If you have been around rodents and have symptoms of fever, deep muscle aches, and severe shortness of breath, see your doctor immediately. There is no specific treatment, cure, or vaccine for HPS. Patients may do better if it is recognized early and they get medical care in an intensive care unit. They often need to use a breathing machine and have oxygen therapy. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are head lice? Head lice are tiny insects that live on people's heads. Adult lice are about the size of sesame seeds. The eggs, called nits, are even smaller - about the size of a dandruff flake. Lice and nits are found on or near the scalp, most often at the neckline and behind the ears. Head lice are parasites, and they need to feed on human blood to survive. They are one of the three types of lice that live on humans. The other two types are body lice and pubic lice . Each type of lice is different, and getting one type does not mean that you will get another type. How do head lice spread? Lice move by crawling, because they cannot hop or fly. They spread by close person-to-person contact. Rarely, they can spread through sharing personal belongings such as hats or hairbrushes. Personal hygiene and cleanliness have nothing to do with getting head lice. You also cannot get pubic lice from animals. Head lice do not spread disease. Who is at risk for head lice? Children ages 3-11 and their families get head lice most often. This is because young children often have head-to-head contact while playing together. What are the symptoms of head lice? The symptoms of head lice include: Tickling feeling in the hair Frequent itching, which is caused by an allergic reaction to the bites Sores from scratching. Sometimes the sores can become infected with bacteria. Trouble sleeping, because head lice are most active in the dark How do you know if you have head lice? A diagnosis of head lice usually comes from seeing a louse or nit. Because they are very small and move quickly, you may need to use a magnifying lens and a fine-toothed comb to find lice or nits. What are the treatments for head lice? Treatments for head lice include both over-the-counter and prescription shampoos, creams, and lotions. If you want to use an over-the-counter treatment and you aren't sure which one to use or how to use one, ask your health care provider or pharmacist. You should also check with your health care provider first if you are pregnant or nursing, or if you want to use a treatment on a young child. Follow these steps when using a head lice treatment: Apply the product according to the instructions. Only apply it to the scalp and the hair attached to the scalp. You should not use it on other body hair. Use only one product at a time, unless your health care provider tells you to use two different kinds at once Pay attention to what the instructions say about how long you should leave the medicine on the hair and on how you should rinse it out After rinsing, use a fine-toothed comb or special "nit comb" to remove dead lice and nits After each treatment, check your hair for lice and nits.  You should comb your hair to remove nits and lice every 2-3 days. Do this for 2-3 weeks to be sure that all lice and nits are gone. All household members and other close contacts should be checked and treated if necessary. If an over-the-counter treatment does not work for you, you can ask your health care provider for a prescription product. Can head lice be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent the spread of lice. If you already have lice, besides treatment, you should: Wash your clothes, bedding, and towels with hot water, and dry them using the hot cycle of the dryer Soak your combs and brushes in hot water for 5-10 minutes Vacuum the floor and furniture, particularly where you sat or lay If there are items that you cannot wash, seal them in a plastic bag for two weeks To prevent your children from spreading lice: Teach children to avoid head-to-head contact during play and other activities Teach children not to share clothing and other items that they put on their head, such as headphones, hair ties, and helmets If your child has lice, be sure to check the policies at school and/or daycare. Your child may not be able to go back until the lice have been completely treated. There is no clear scientific evidence that lice can be suffocated by home remedies, such as mayonnaise, olive oil, or similar substances. You also should not use kerosene or gasoline; they are dangerous and flammable. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is a type of bacteria that causes infection in the stomach. It is the main cause of peptic ulcers , and it can also cause gastritis and stomach cancer . About 30 to 40% of people in the United States get an H. pylori infection. Most people get it as a child. H. pylori usually does not cause symptoms. But it can break down the inner protective coating in some people's stomachs and cause inflammation. This can lead to gastritis or a peptic ulcer. Researchers aren't sure how H. pylori spreads. They think that it may spread by unclean food and water, or through contact with an infected person's saliva and other body fluids. A peptic ulcer causes a dull or burning pain in your stomach, especially when you have an empty stomach. It lasts for minutes to hours, and it may come and go for several days or weeks.  It may also cause other symptoms, such as bloating, nausea, and weight loss. If you have the symptoms of a peptic ulcer, your health care provider will check to see whether you have H. pylori.  There are blood, breath, and stool tests to check for H. pylori. In some cases, you may need an upper endoscopy , often with a biopsy . If you do have a peptic ulcer, the treatment is with a combination of antibiotics and acid-reducing medicines. You will need to be tested again after treatment to make sure the infection is gone. There is no vaccine for H. pylori. Since H. pylori might spread through unclean food and water, you might be able to prevent it if you: Wash your hands after using the bathroom and before eating Eat properly prepared food Drink water from a clean, safe source NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Viral hemorrhagic fevers (VHFs) are a group of illnesses caused by four families of viruses. These include the Ebola and Marburg, Lassa fever, and yellow fever viruses. VHFs have common features: they affect many organs, they damage the blood vessels, and they affect the body's ability to regulate itself. Some VHFs cause mild disease, but some, like Ebola or Marburg, cause severe disease and death. VHFs are found around the world. Specific diseases are usually limited to areas where the animals that carry them live. For example, Lassa fever is limited to rural areas of West Africa where rats and mice carry the virus. The risk for travelers is low, but you should avoid visiting areas where there are disease outbreaks. Because there are no effective treatments for some of these viral infections, there is concern about their use in bioterrorism . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is hepatitis? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver . Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. It can damage your liver. This swelling and damage can affect how well your liver functions. Hepatitis can be an acute (short-term) infection or a chronic (long-term) infection. Some types of hepatitis cause only acute infections. Other types can cause both acute and chronic infections. What causes hepatitis? There are different types of hepatitis, with different causes: Viral hepatitis is the most common type. It is caused by one of several viruses -- hepatitis viruses A , B , C , D, and E. In the United States, A, B, and C are the most common. Alcoholic hepatitis is caused by heavy alcohol use Toxic hepatitis can be caused by certain poisons, chemicals, medicines, or supplements Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic type in which your body's immune system attacks your liver. The cause is not known, but genetics and your environment may play a role. How is viral hepatitis spread? Hepatitis A and hepatitis E usually spread through contact with food or water that was contaminated with an infected person's stool. You can also get hepatitis E by eating undercooked pork, deer, or shellfish. Hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and hepatitis D spread through contact with the blood of someone who has the disease. Hepatitis B and D may also spread through contact with other body fluids. This can happen in many ways, such as sharing drug needles or having unprotected sex. Who is at risk for hepatitis? The risks are different for the different types of hepatitis. For example, with most of the viral types, your risk is higher if you have unprotected sex.  People who drink a lot over long periods of time are at risk for alcoholic hepatitis. What are the symptoms of hepatitis? Some people with hepatitis do not have symptoms and do not know they are infected. If you do have symptoms, they may include: Fever Fatigue Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Abdominal pain Dark urine Clay-colored bowel movements Joint pain Jaundice , yellowing of your skin and eyes If you have an acute infection, your symptoms can start anywhere between 2 weeks to 6 months after you got infected. If you have a chronic infection, you may not have symptoms until many years later. What other problems can hepatitis cause? Chronic hepatitis can lead to complications such as cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), liver failure, and liver cancer . Early diagnosis and treatment of chronic hepatitis may prevent these complications. How is hepatitis diagnosed? To diagnose hepatitis, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history Will do a physical exam Will likely do blood tests, including tests for viral hepatitis Might do imaging tests , such as an ultrasound , CT scan , or MRI May need to do a liver biopsy to get a clear diagnosis and check for liver damage What are the treatments for hepatitis? Treatment for hepatitis depends on which type you have and whether it is acute or chronic. Acute viral hepatitis often goes away on its own. To feel better, you may just need to rest and get enough fluids. But in some cases, it may be more serious. You might even need treatment in a hospital. There are different medicines to treat the different chronic types of hepatitis. Possible other treatments may include surgery and other medical procedures. People who have alcoholic hepatitis need to stop drinking. If your chronic hepatitis leads to liver failure or liver cancer, you may need a liver transplant . Can hepatitis be prevented? There are different ways to prevent or lower your risk for hepatitis, depending on the type of hepatitis. For example, not drinking too much alcohol can prevent alcoholic hepatitis. There are vaccines to prevent hepatitis A and B. Autoimmune hepatitis cannot be prevented. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hepatitis? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver . Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. It can damage your liver. This swelling and damage can affect how well your liver functions. What is hepatitis A? Hepatitis A is a type of viral hepatitis. It causes an acute, or short-term, infection. This means that people usually get better without treatment after a few weeks. Thanks to a vaccine, hepatitis A is not very common in the United States. What causes hepatitis A? Hepatitis A is caused by the hepatitis A virus. The virus spreads through contact with an infected person's stool. This can happen if you: Eat food made by someone who has the virus and did not properly wash their hands after using the bathroom Drink contaminated water or eat foods that were rinsed with contaminated water Have close personal contact with someone who has hepatitis A. This could be through certain types of sex (like oral-anal sex), taking care of someone who is ill, or using illegal drugs with others. Who is at risk for hepatitis A? Although anyone can get hepatitis A, you are at higher risk if you: Travel to developing countries Have sex with someone who has hepatitis A Are a man who has sex with men Use illegal drugs Are experiencing homelessness Live with or care for someone who has hepatitis A Live with or care for a child recently adopted from a country where hepatitis A is common What are the symptoms of hepatitis A? Not everyone with hepatitis A has symptoms. Adults are more likely to have symptoms than children. If you do have symptoms, they usually start 2 to 7 weeks after infection. They can include: Dark yellow urine Diarrhea Fatigue Fever Gray- or clay-colored stools Joint pain Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Abdominal pain Yellowish eyes and skin, called jaundice The symptoms usually last less than 2 months, although some people can be ill for as long as 6 months. You are at a higher risk of getting a more severe infection from hepatitis A if you also have HIV , hepatitis B , or hepatitis C . What other problems can hepatitis A cause? In rare cases, hepatitis A may lead to liver failure. This is more common in adults over age 50 and in people who have another liver . How is hepatitis A diagnosed? To diagnose hepatitis A, your health care provider may use many tools: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam Blood tests, including tests for viral hepatitis What are the treatments for hepatitis A? There is no specific treatment for hepatitis A. The best way to recover is to rest, drink plenty of liquids, and eat healthy foods. Your provider may also suggest medicines to help relieve symptoms. In more severe cases, you may need care in a hospital. Can hepatitis A be prevented? The best way to prevent hepatitis A is to get the hepatitis A vaccine. It is also important to have good hygiene , especially washing your hands thoroughly after you go to the bathroom. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hepatitis? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver . Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. It can damage your liver. This swelling and damage can affect how well your liver functions. What is hepatitis B? Hepatitis B is a type of viral hepatitis. It can cause an acute (short-term) or chronic (long-term) infection. People with an acute infection usually get better on their own without treatment. Some people with chronic hepatitis B will need treatment. Thanks to a vaccine, hepatitis B is not very common in the United States. It is more common in certain parts of the world, such as sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia. What causes hepatitis B? Hepatitis B is caused by the hepatitis B virus. The virus spreads through contact with blood, semen, or other body fluids from a person who has the virus. Who is at risk for hepatitis B? Anyone can get hepatitis B, but the risk is higher in: Infants born to mothers who have hepatitis B People who inject drugs or share needles, syringes, and other types of drug equipment Sex partners of people with hepatitis B, especially if they are not using latex or polyurethane condoms during sex Men who have sex with men People who live with someone who has hepatitis B, especially if they use the same razor, toothbrush, or nail clippers Health care and public-safety workers who are exposed to blood on the job Hemodialysis patients People who have lived in or traveled often to parts of the world where hepatitis B is common Have diabetes , hepatitis C , or HIV What are the symptoms of hepatitis B? Often, people with hepatitis B don't have symptoms. Adults and children over 5 are more likely to have symptoms than younger children. Some people with acute hepatitis B have symptoms 2 to 5 months after infection. These symptoms can include: Dark yellow urine Diarrhea Fatigue Fever Gray- or clay-colored stools Joint pain Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Abdominal pain Yellowish eyes and skin, called jaundice If you have chronic hepatitis B, you may not have symptoms until complications develop. This could be decades after you were infected. For this reason, hepatitis B screening is important, even if you have no symptoms. Screening means that you are tested for a disease even though you don't have symptoms. If you are at high risk, your health care provider may suggest  screening. What other problems can hepatitis B cause? In rare cases, acute hepatitis B can cause liver failure. Chronic hepatitis B can develop into a serious disease that causes long-term health problems such as cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), liver cancer , and liver failure. If you have ever had hepatitis B, the virus may become active again, or reactivated, later in life. This could start to damage the liver and cause symptoms. How is hepatitis B diagnosed? To diagnose hepatitis B, your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam Blood tests, including tests for viral hepatitis What are the treatments for hepatitis B? If you have acute hepatitis B, you probably don't need treatment. Some people with chronic hepatitis B don't need treatment. But if you have a chronic infection and blood tests show that hepatitis B could be damaging your liver, you may need to take antiviral medicines. Can hepatitis B be prevented? The best way to prevent hepatitis B is to get the hepatitis B vaccine. You can also reduce your chance of hepatitis B infection by: Not sharing drug needles or other drug materials Wearing gloves if you have to touch another person's blood or open sores Making sure your tattoo artist or body piercer uses sterile tools Not sharing personal items, such as toothbrushes, razors, or nail clippers Using a latex condom during sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. If you think you have been in contact with the hepatitis B virus, see your health care provider right away. Your provider may give you a dose of the hepatitis B vaccine to prevent infection. In some cases, your provider may also give you a medicine called hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG). You need to get the vaccine and the HBIG (if needed) as soon as possible after coming into contact with the virus. It is best if you can get them within 24 hours. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hepatitis C? Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver. Inflammation is swelling that happens when tissues of the body are injured or infected. Inflammation can damage organs. There are different types of hepatitis. One type, hepatitis C, is caused by the hepatitis C virus (HCV). Hepatitis C can range from a mild illness lasting a few weeks to a serious, lifelong illness. Hepatitis C can be acute or chronic: Acute hepatitis C is a short-term infection. The symptoms can last up to 6 months. Sometimes your body is able to fight off the infection and the virus goes away. But for most people, an acute infection leads to chronic infection. Chronic hepatitis C is a long-lasting infection. If it is not treated, it can last for a lifetime and cause serious health problems, including liver damage, cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), liver cancer , and even death. How is hepatitis C spread? Hepatitis C spreads through contact with the blood of someone who has HCV. This contact may be through: Sharing drug needles or other drug materials with someone who has HCV. In the United States, this is the most common way that people get hepatitis C. Getting an accidental stick with a needle that was used on someone who has HCV. This can happen in health care settings. Being tattooed or pierced with tools or inks that were not sterilized after being used on someone who has HCV. Having contact with the blood or open sores of someone who has HCV. Sharing personal care items that may have come in contact with another person's blood, such as razors or toothbrushes. Being born to a mother with HCV. Having unprotected sex with someone who has HCV. Before 1992, hepatitis C was also commonly spread through blood transfusions and organ transplants. Since then, there has been routine testing of the U.S. blood supply for HCV. It is now very rare for someone to get HCV this way. Who is more likely to get hepatitis C? You are more likely to get hepatitis C if you: Have injected drugs Had a blood transfusion or organ transplant before July 1992 Have hemophilia and received clotting factor before 1987 Have been on kidney dialysis Have been in contact with blood or infected needles at work Have had tattoos or body piercings Have worked or lived in a prison Were born to a mother with hepatitis C Have HIV Have had more than one sex partner in the last 6 months Have had a sexually transmitted infection (STI) Are a man who has had sex with men (MSM) If you are at high risk for hepatitis C, your health care provider will likely recommend that you get tested for it. What are the symptoms of hepatitis C? Most people with hepatitis C have no symptoms. Some people with acute hepatitis C do have symptoms within 1 to 3 months after they are exposed to the virus. These symptoms may include: Dark yellow urine Fatigue Fever Gray- or clay-colored stools Joint pain Loss of appetite Nausea and/or vomiting Pain in your abdomen (belly) Jaundice (yellowish eyes and skin) If you have chronic hepatitis C, you probably will not have symptoms until it causes complications. This can happen decades after you were infected. For this reason, hepatitis C screening is important, even if you have no symptoms. What other problems can hepatitis C cause? Without treatment, hepatitis C may lead to cirrhosis, liver failure, and liver cancer. Early diagnosis and treatment of hepatitis C can prevent these complications. How is hepatitis C diagnosed? Providers diagnose hepatitis C based on your medical history, a physical exam, and blood tests. If you do have hepatitis C, you may need additional tests to check for liver damage. These tests may include other blood tests, an ultrasound of the liver, and a liver biopsy . What are the treatments for hepatitis C? Treatment for hepatitis C is with antiviral medicines. They can cure the disease in most cases. If you have acute hepatitis C, your provider may wait to see if your infection becomes chronic before starting treatment. If your hepatitis C causes cirrhosis, you should see a doctor who specializes in liver diseases. Treatments for health problems related to cirrhosis include medicines, surgery, and other medical procedures. If your hepatitis C leads to liver failure or liver cancer, you may need a liver transplant . Can hepatitis C be prevented? There is no vaccine for hepatitis C. But you can help protect yourself from hepatitis C infection by: Not sharing drug needles or other drug materials. Wearing gloves if you have to touch another person's blood or open sores. Making sure your tattoo artist or body piercer uses sterile tools and unopened ink. Not sharing personal items such toothbrushes, razors, or nail clippers. Using a latex condom during sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Herpes is an infection that is caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). Oral herpes causes cold sores around the mouth or face. Genital herpes affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area.  Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection (STI). It affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area. Other herpes infections can affect the eyes, skin, or other parts of the body. The virus can be dangerous in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems. There are two types of HSV: HSV type 1 most commonly causes cold sores. It can also cause genital herpes. HSV type 2 is the usual cause of genital herpes, but it also can infect the mouth. HSV spreads through direct contact. Some people have no symptoms. Others get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. They turn into blisters, become itchy and painful, and then heal. Most people have outbreaks several times a year. Over time, you get them less often. Medicines to help your body fight the virus can help lessen symptoms and decrease outbreaks.

What is histoplasmosis? Histoplasmosis is an infection caused by a fungus called Histoplasma . This fungus is common in the central and eastern United States, especially around the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys. It can also be found in parts of Central and South America, Africa, Asia, and Australia. It lives in the environment, especially in soil that contains large amounts of bat or bird droppings (poop). How do you get histoplasmosis? You get histoplasmosis by breathing in Histoplasma fungal spores from the air. It usually happens after you have been doing an activity that disturbs the soil, such as farming, construction, and landscaping. Histoplasmosis is not contagious. This means that you cannot get the infection from another person or an animal. What are the symptoms of histoplasmosis? Most people who breathe in the spores never have any symptoms. If you do get symptoms, they usually start between 3 and 17 days after you breathe in the spores. The symptoms may include: Fever Cough Fatigue Chills Headache Chest pain Body aches For most people, the symptoms of histoplasmosis will go away within a few weeks to a month. However, some people can have symptoms that last longer, especially if their infection becomes severe. Certain people are more likely to get a severe infection: People who have weakened immune systems , for example from: Having HIV Having had an organ transplant Taking medicines which weaken your immune system, such as chemotherapy and steroids Infants Adults age 55 and over Severe histoplasmosis can develop into a long-term lung infection. It can also spread from the lungs to other parts of the body, such as the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord). This is known as disseminated histoplasmosis. How is histoplasmosis diagnosed? To find out if you have histoplasmosis, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and your medical and travel history Will do a physical exam Will likely order a blood, urine, or tissue test to look for signs of the fungus May order a chest x-ray or CT scan of the lungs What are the treatments for histoplasmosis? For some people, the symptoms of histoplasmosis will go away without treatment. But you will need treatment if you have severe histoplasmosis in the lungs, chronic histoplasmosis, or an infection that has spread to other parts of the body. That treatment would be with prescription antifungal medicines. In some cases, you may need to take the medicines for 3 months to 1 year. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is HIV? HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. HIV harms your immune system by destroying a type of white blood cell that helps your body fight infection. This puts you at risk for other infections and diseases. What is AIDS? AIDS stands for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. It is the final stage of infection with HIV. It happens when the body's immune system is badly damaged because of the virus. Not everyone with HIV develops AIDS. How does HIV spread? HIV is spread through certain body fluids from a person who has HIV. This can happen: By having unprotected vaginal or anal sex with a person who has HIV. "Unprotected" means not using condoms or medicine to treat or prevent HIV. This is the most common way that it spreads. By sharing drug needles. Through contact with the blood of a person with HIV. From mother to baby during pregnancy , childbirth, or breastfeeding. Who is at risk for HIV infection? Anyone can get HIV, but certain groups have a higher risk of getting it: People who have another sexually transmitted infection (STI). Having an STI can increase your risk of getting or spreading HIV. People who inject drugs with shared needles. Gay and bisexual men. Black/African Americans and Hispanic/Latino Americans. They make up a higher proportion of new HIV diagnoses and people with HIV, compared to other races and ethnicities. People who engage in risky sexual behaviors, such as not using condoms or medicine to prevent or treat HIV. Factors such as stigma, discrimination, income, education, and geographic region can also affect people's risk for HIV. What are the symptoms of HIV? The first signs of HIV infection may be flu-like symptoms: Fever Chills Rash Night sweats (heavy sweating during sleep) Muscle aches Sore throat Fatigue Swollen lymph nodes Mouth ulcers These symptoms may come and go within two to four weeks. This stage is called acute HIV infection. If the infection is not treated, it becomes chronic HIV infection. Often, there are no symptoms during this stage. If it is not treated, eventually the virus will weaken your body's immune system. Then the infection will progress to AIDS. This is the late stage of HIV infection. Because your immune system is badly damaged, your body cannot fight off other infections, called opportunistic infections (OIs). OIs are infections that happen more frequently or are more severe in people who have weakened immune systems. Some people may not feel sick during the earlier stages of HIV infection. So the only way to know for sure whether you have HIV is to get tested. How do I know if I have HIV? A blood test can tell if you have HIV infection. Your health care provider can do the test, or you can use a home testing kit. You can also use the CDC Testing Locator to find free testing sites. What are the treatments for HIV? There is no cure for HIV infection, but it can be treated with medicines . This is called antiretroviral therapy (ART).  ART can make HIV infection a manageable chronic condition. It also reduces the risk of spreading the virus to others. Most people with HIV live long and healthy lives if they get ART as soon as possible and stay on it. It's also important to take care of yourself. Making sure that you have the support you need, living a healthy lifestyle, and getting regular medical care can help you enjoy a better quality of life . Can HIV infection be prevented? You can reduce the risk of getting or spreading HIV by: Getting tested for HIV. Choosing less risky sexual behaviors. This includes limiting the number of sexual partners you have and using latex condoms every time you have sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Getting tested and treated for sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Not injecting drugs. Talking to your health care provider about medicines to prevent HIV : PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) is for people who don't already have HIV but are at very high risk of getting it. PrEP is daily medicine that can reduce this risk. PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) is for people who have possibly been exposed to HIV. It is only for emergency situations. PEP must be started within 72 hours after a possible exposure to HIV. NIH: National Institutes of Health

What are opportunistic infections (OIs) in HIV? Having HIV weakens your body's immune system. It destroys the white blood cells that fight infection. This puts you at risk for opportunistic infections (OIs). OIs are serious infections that take advantage of your weak immune system. These infections are less common and less severe in healthy people. People who have AIDS, the most severe stage of HIV infection, have badly damaged immune systems. This puts them especially at risk for OIs. Getting certain OIs is one of the ways that people can get diagnosed with AIDS. OIs are becoming less common in people with HIV because of effective HIV medicines . But some people with HIV still develop OIs for different reasons: They may not know they have HIV, so they aren't getting treatment for it They know that they have HIV but are not taking treatment Their HIV treatment may not be working properly What are the different types of opportunistic infections (OIs)? There are many types of OIs: Bacterial infections , including tuberculosis , Salmonella infection , and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) Viral infections , such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) and herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) Fungal infections , like yeast infections , Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), and histoplasmosis Parasitic infections , such as cryptosporidiosis and toxoplasmosis Having HIV can make infections harder to treat. People with HIV are also more likely to have complications from common illnesses such as the flu. What are the treatments for opportunistic infections (OIs)? If you develop an OI, there are treatments available such as antiviral, antibiotic , and antifungal drugs. The type of medicine your health care provider prescribes will depend on which OI you have. After the OI has been successfully treated, you may still need to take the same medicine or another medicine to prevent the OI from coming back. Can opportunistic infections (OIs) be prevented? The best way to prevent OIs infections is by taking your HIV medicines. Other steps you can take to help prevent OIs include: Avoiding exposure to contaminated food and water : Don't undercooked eggs, unpasteurized dairy products or fruit juices, or raw seed sprouts Don't drink water directly from a lake or river Talking to your provider about medicines and vaccines that prevent certain OIs Preventing exposure to other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) by using condoms every time you have sex Washing your hands thoroughly with warm, soapy water after any contact with human or animal feces (poop) Not sharing needles, syringes, or other drug injection equipment

What are PrEP and PEP? PrEP and PEP are medicines to prevent HIV . Each type is used in a different situation: PrEP stands for pre-exposure prophylaxis. It is for people who don't already have HIV but are at risk of getting it. PrEP is medicine that can reduce this risk. It can either be a pill that you take every day or an injection that you get every two months. With PrEP, if you do get exposed to HIV, the medicine can stop HIV from taking hold and spreading throughout your body. PEP stands for post-exposure prophylaxis. PEP is for people who have possibly been exposed to HIV. It is only for emergency situations. PEP must be started within 72 hours after a possible exposure to HIV. PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) Who should consider taking PrEP? PrEP can help protect you if you don't have HIV and any of these applies to you: You have had anal or vaginal sex in the past 6 months and: Have a sexual partner with HIV, Have not consistently used a condom, OR Have been diagnosed with a sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the past 6 months You inject drugs and: Share needles or other equipment to inject drugs OR Have an injection partner with HIV You have been prescribed PEP and: Continue engaging in high-risk behaviors OR Have used multiple courses of PEP If you have a partner who is HIV-positive and are considering getting pregnant, talk to your health care provider about PrEP. Taking it may help protect you and your baby from getting HIV infection while you try to get pregnant, during pregnancy , or while breastfeeding. How well does PrEP work? PrEP is very effective when you take it consistently. It reduces the risk of getting HIV from sex by about 99%. In people who inject drugs, it reduces the risk of HIV by at least 74%. PrEP is much less effective if you do not take it consistently. PrEP does not protect against other STIs, so you should still use latex condoms every time you have sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. You must have an HIV test every 3 months while taking PrEP, so you'll have regular follow-up visits with your health care provider. If you are having trouble taking PrEP every day or if you want to stop taking PrEP, talk to your provider. Does PrEP cause side effects? Some people taking PrEP may have side effects, like nausea. The side effects are usually not serious and often get better over time. If you are taking PrEP, tell your provider if you have a side effect that bothers you or that does not go away. PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) Who should consider taking PEP? If you are HIV-negative and you think you may have been recently exposed to HIV, contact your health care provider immediately or go to an emergency room right away. You may be prescribed PEP if you are HIV negative or don't know your HIV status, and in the last 72 hours you may have been exposed to HIV: During sex, for example if a condom broke during sex with someone who could have HIV, Through the sharing of needles or drug preparation equipment, OR Through sexual assault Your provider or emergency room doctor will help to decide whether PEP is right for you. PEP may also be given to a health care worker after a possible exposure to HIV at work, for example, from a needlestick injury. When should I start PEP and how long do I need to take it? PEP must be started within 72 hours (3 days) after a possible exposure to HIV. The sooner you start it, the better; every hour counts. You need to take the PEP medicines every day for 28 days. You will have to see your provider at certain times during and after taking the PEP, so you can have an HIV screening test and other testing. Does PEP cause side effects? Some people taking PEP may have side effects, like nausea. The side effects are usually not serious and often get better over time. If you are taking PEP, tell your provider if you have a side effect that bothers you or that does not go away. PEP medicines may also interact with other medicines that a person is taking (called a drug interaction ). So it's important to tell your provider about any other medicines that you take. Can I take PEP every time I have unprotected sex? PEP is only for emergency situations. It is not the right choice for people who may be exposed to HIV frequently - for example, if you often have sex without a condom with a partner who is HIV-positive. In that case, you should talk to your health care provider about whether PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) would be right for you.

What is HPV? Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of related viruses. They can cause warts on different parts of your body. There are more than 200 types. About 40 of them are spread through direct sexual contact with someone who has the virus. They can also spread through other intimate, skin-to-skin contact. Some of these types can cause cancer. There are two categories of sexually transmitted HPV. Low-risk HPV can cause warts on or around your genitals , anus, mouth, or throat. High-risk HPV can cause various cancers: Cervical cancer Anal cancer Some types of oral and throat cancer Vulvar cancer Vaginal cancer Penile cancer Most HPV infections go away on their own and don't cause cancer. But sometimes the infections last longer. When a high-risk HPV infection lasts for many years, it can lead to cell changes. If these changes are not treated, they may get worse over time and become cancer. Who is at risk for HPV infections? HPV infections are very common. Nearly all sexually active people are infected with HPV soon after they become sexually active. What are the symptoms of HPV infections? Some people develop warts from certain low-risk HPV infections, but the other types (including the high-risk types) have no symptoms. If a high-risk HPV infection lasts for many years and causes cell changes, you may have symptoms. You may also have symptoms if those cell changes develop into cancer. Which symptoms you have depends on which part of the body is affected. How are HPV infections diagnosed? Health care providers can usually diagnose warts by looking at them. For women, there are cervical cancer screening tests which can find changes in the cervix that might lead to cancer.  As part of the screening, women may have Pap tests , HPV tests , or both. What are the treatments for HPV infections? An HPV infection itself cannot be treated. There are medicines that you can apply to a wart. If they don't work, your health care provide could freeze, burn, or surgically remove it. There are treatments for the cell changes caused by infection with high-risk HPV. They include medicines that you apply to the area that is affected and various surgical procedures. People who have HPV-related cancers usually get the same types of treatment as people who have cancers that are not caused by HPV. An exception to this is for people who have certain oral and throat cancers. They may have different treatment options. Can HPV infections be prevented? Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Vaccines can protect against several types of HPV, including some that can cause cancer. The vaccines provide the most protection when people get them before they are exposed to the virus. This means that it is best for people to get them before they become sexually active. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Impetigo is a skin infection caused by bacteria. It is usually caused by staphylococcal (staph) bacteria, but it can also be caused by streptococcal (strep) bacteria. It is most common in children between the ages of two and six. It usually starts when bacteria get into a break in the skin, such as a cut, scratch, or insect bite. Symptoms start with red or pimple-like sores surrounded by red skin. These sores can be anywhere, but usually they occur on your face, arms and legs. The sores fill with pus, then break open after a few days and form a thick crust. They are often itchy, but scratching them can spread the sores. Impetigo can spread by contact with sores or nasal discharge from an infected person. You can treat impetigo with antibiotics.

Every year, lives are lost because of the spread of infections in hospitals. Health care workers can take steps to prevent the spread of infectious diseases . These steps are part of infection control. Proper hand washing is the most effective way to prevent the spread of infections in hospitals. If you are a patient, don't be afraid to remind friends, family and health care providers to wash their hands before getting close to you. Other steps health care workers can take include: Covering coughs and sneezes Staying up to date with vaccinations Using gloves, masks and protective clothing Making tissues and hand cleaners available Following hospital guidelines when dealing with blood or contaminated items

During pregnancy , some common infections like the common cold or a skin infection do not usually cause serious problems. But other infections can be dangerous to you, your baby, or both. Some infections may lead to preterm birth and low birth weight babies . Others can cause serious illness, birth defects , and lifelong disabilities, such as hearing loss or learning problems . Some of the infections that can be dangerous during pregnancy include: Bacterial vaginosis (BV) Group B strep (GBS) Hepatitis Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Toxoplasmosis Urinary tract infections Yeast infections Zika virus To try to prevent infections: Don't eat raw or undercooked meat. Don't share food or drinks with other people. Wash your hands frequently. Don't empty cat litter. Cats can transmit toxoplasmosis. Talk to your health care provider about vaccinations . If you have sex during pregnancy, use a condom every time. If you do get an infection during pregnancy, contact your health care provider about how best to protect you and your baby. Only some medicines are safe during pregnancy .

Most kinds of arthritis cause pain and swelling in your joints. Joints are places where two bones meet, such as your elbow or knee.  Infectious arthritis is an infection in the joint. The infection comes from a bacterial, viral, or fungal infection that spreads from another part of the body.  Symptoms of infectious arthritis include: Intense pain in the joint Joint redness and swelling Chills and fever Inability to move the area with the infected joint One type of infectious arthritis is reactive arthritis. The reaction is to an infection somewhere else in your body. The joint is usually the knee, ankle, or toe.  Sometimes, reactive arthritis is set off by an infection in the bladder, or in the urethra, which carries urine out of the body. In women, an infection in the vagina can cause the reaction. For both men and women, it can start with bacteria passed on during sex. Another form of reactive arthritis starts with eating food or handling something that has bacteria on it. To diagnose infectious arthritis, your health care provider may do tests of your blood, urine, and joint fluid. Treatment includes medicines and sometimes surgery.

What are infectious diseases? Germs, or microbes, are found everywhere - in the air, soil, and water.  There are also germs on your skin and in your body.  Many of them are harmless, and some can even be helpful. But some of them can make you sick. Infectious diseases are diseases that are caused by germs. What are the different types of germs that cause infectious diseases? There are four main types of germs: Bacteria are one-celled germs that multiply quickly. They may give off toxins, which are harmful chemicals that can make you sick. Strep throat and urinary tract infections are common bacterial infections. Viruses are tiny capsules that contain genetic material. They invade your cells so that they can multiply. This can kill, damage, or change the cells and make you sick. Viral infections include HIV and the common cold . Fungi are primitive plant-like organisms such as mushrooms, mold, mildew, and yeasts. Athlete's foot and yeast infections are common fungal infections. Parasites are animals or plants that survive by living on or in other living things. Malaria and head lice are infections that are caused by parasites. How can you get infectious diseases? There are many different ways that you can get an infectious disease, depending on the type of germ. They can include: Through direct contact with a person who is sick. This includes kissing, touching, sneezing, coughing, and sexual contact. Pregnant people can also pass some germs along to their babies. Through indirect contact, when you touch something that has germs on it. For example, you could get germs if someone who is sick touched a door handle, and then you touch it. Through insect or animal bites. Through contaminated food , water, soil, or plants. What are the symptoms of infectious diseases? Infectious diseases can cause many different symptoms. Some are so mild that you may not even notice any symptoms, while others can be life-threatening. What are the treatments for infectious diseases? There are treatments for some infectious diseases, such as antibiotic , antiviral, antifungal and anti-parasitic medicines. But for other infections, such as some caused by viruses, you can only treat your symptoms while you wait for your immune system to fight off the germ. Can infectious diseases be prevented? You can take steps to help prevent many infectious diseases: Get vaccinated . Wash your hands often . Pay attention to food safety . Avoid contact with wild animals. Use a latex condom every time you have sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Don't share items such as toothbrushes, combs, and straws.

What is infectious mononucleosis (mono)? Infectious mononucleosis (mono) is a disease caused by viruses .The most common cause is the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Mono is contagious, which means it can spread from person to person. It is common among teenagers and young adults, especially college students. What causes infectious mononucleosis (mono)? Mono can be caused by many different viruses. But it is most often caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). EBV is found all over the world. Most people get an EBV infection at some point in their lives, but only some of them will get the symptoms of mono. EBV infections often happen during childhood or when someone is a young adult. EBV infections in children usually do not cause symptoms. And when they do, it's hard to tell the difference between the symptoms of mono and the symptoms of other common childhood illnesses such as the flu . Teens and young adults who get EBV are more likely to have symptoms that are typical of mono. EBV and the other viruses that cause mono are usually spread through body fluids, especially saliva (spit). This means that you can get it through kissing. That's why mono is sometimes called "the kissing disease." But you can also get these viruses if you share food, drinks, forks, spoons, or lip balm with someone who has mono. Other less common ways of getting an infection are through blood transfusions , organ transplants , and blood and semen during sexual contact. What are the symptoms of infectious mononucleosis (mono)? The symptoms of mono usually start four to six weeks after you get the infection. But they may start sooner in young children. The symptoms often develop slowly, and they may not all happen at the same time. They can include: Extreme fatigue Fever Sore throat Head and body aches Swollen lymph glands in your neck and armpits Rash Swollen liver, spleen, or both (these are less common symptoms) Most people get better in two to four weeks. However, some people may feel fatigued for several more weeks. Occasionally, the symptoms can last for six months or longer. How is infectious mononucleosis (mono) diagnosed? Your healthcare provider may diagnose mono based on your symptoms and a physical exam. The exam will include checking to see if your lymph nodes, tonsils, liver, or spleen are swollen. In some cases, your provider might also order a mono test to confirm the diagnosis. What are the treatments for infectious mononucleosis (mono)? Drinking plenty of fluids to avoid dehydration . Getting lots of rest. Taking over-the-counter medications for pain and fever. But don't give aspirin to children or teens because it may cause Reye syndrome . This syndrome is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. If you have severe symptoms, your provider may suggest additional treatment based on which organs in your body are affected by the mono. Antibiotics don't treat viral infections, so they do not help with mono. Some people do get bacterial infections such as strep throat along with mono. In that case, you probably need antibiotics to treat the bacterial infection. But you should not take penicillin antibiotics like ampicillin or amoxicillin. Those antibiotics can cause a rash in people who have mono. Mono can cause an enlarged spleen, which could rupture and cause a medical emergency. To try to protect the spleen, providers recommend avoiding intense exercise and contact sports until you fully recover (about a month). Can infectious mononucleosis (mono) be prevented? There is no vaccine to protect against mono. To lower your chance of getting or spreading mono: Don't share food, drinks, forks, spoons, or lip balm with anyone, especially if you or the other person has mono. Don't kiss someone if you or the other person has mono. Wash your hands often with soap and water. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is itching? Itching is an irritating sensation that makes you want to scratch your skin. Sometimes it can feel like pain, but it is different. Often, you feel itchy in one area in your body, but sometimes you may feel itching all over. Along with the itching, you may also have a rash or hives . What causes itching? Itching is a symptom of many health conditions. Some common causes are: Allergic reactions to food , insect bites , pollen , and medicines Skin conditions such as eczema , psoriasis , and dry skin Irritating chemicals, cosmetics , and other substances Parasites such as pinworms , scabies , head and body lice Pregnancy Liver , kidney , or thyroid diseases Certain cancers or cancer treatments Diseases that can affect the nervous system, such as diabetes and shingles What are the treatments for itching? Most itching is not serious. To feel better, you could try: Applying cold compresses Using moisturizing lotions Taking lukewarm or oatmeal baths Using over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream or antihistamines Avoiding scratching, wearing irritating fabrics, and exposure to high heat and humidity Contact your health care provider if your itching is severe, does not go away after a few weeks, or does not have an apparent cause. You may need other treatments, such as medicines or light therapy. If you have an underlying disease that is causing the itching, treating that disease may help.

What is Legionnaires' Disease? Legionnaires' disease is a serious type of pneumonia caused by Legionella bacteria . The disease got its name when a group of people at an American Legion convention became ill with this type of pneumonia. Legionella is found naturally in freshwater, such as lakes and rivers. It can also be found in soil. But people usually only get sick from it when if it grows and spreads in man-made water systems. These systems can include hot tubs, fountains, and the plumbing systems of large buildings, such as hotels or nursing homes. Legionella can also cause Pontiac fever. This is a milder, flu-like illness that doesn't infect your lungs. What causes Legionnaires' disease? You can get the infection by breathing in mist or small drops of water that contain the bacteria. The mist may come from hot tubs, showers, or large building air conditioning units. You usually can't get infected by drinking water that contains the bacteria unless you aspirate it (accidentally breathe the water into your lungs). The bacteria don't spread from person to person. Disease outbreaks happen when many people are exposed to the same water source that contains the bacteria. Who is more likely to develop Legionnaires' disease? Most healthy people who come in contact with the bacteria do not become sick. You are more likely to develop an infection if you: Are over the age of 50 Are a current or former smoker Have a chronic (long-lasting) disease such as diabetes or kidney failure Have a chronic lung disease such as COPD or emphysema Have a weakened immune system due to a disease such as HIV or cancer or are taking medicines that suppress your immune system Live in a long-term care facility Have recently stayed in a hospital or had surgery requiring anesthesia What are the symptoms of Legionnaires' disease? The symptoms usually show up 2 to 14 days after you were exposed to Legionella bacteria. Most of the symptoms are similar to those of other types of pneumonia. But Legionnaires' disease may also cause gastrointestinal symptoms and mental changes. The symptoms of Legionnaires' disease may include: Cough High fever Chills Headache Chest pain Shortness of breath Fatigue Nausea and vomiting Diarrhea Confusion What other problems can Legionnaires' disease cause? Legionnaires' disease can cause life-threatening complications such as respiratory failure , kidney failure, and sepsis . About 1 out of every 10 people who get sick with Legionnaires' disease will die from complications of the illness. How is Legionnaires' disease diagnosed? To find out if you have Legionnaires' disease, your health care provider will probably order a chest x-ray to see if you have pneumonia. If you do have it, lab tests such as a urine or sputum test can check for the Legionella bacteria. Your provider may also order a blood test to see if you have been exposed to the bacteria. What are the treatments for Legionnaires' disease? If you have Legionnaires' disease, you will likely need care in a hospital. The treatment is with antibiotics . Most people will recover, especially if they were healthy when they got the disease. Getting treatment early can increase the chances of getting better. Can Legionnaires' disease be prevented? You can lower your risk of getting Legionnaires' disease if you: Clean all your water-related devices regularly. This could include portable humidifiers, water heaters, air conditioners, and nasal rinses. If you haven't used your faucets and showerheads for a week or more, flush them by letting the hot and cold faucets run for at least two minutes before use. Avoid exposure to water sources such as decorative foundations or hot tubs if you don't know how well they are maintained. Use windshield cleaner in your wiper fluid tank in your car instead of water. Ask about how well your buildings' water systems are maintained. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Leishmaniasis is a parasitic disease spread by the bite of infected sand flies. There are several different forms of leishmaniasis. The most common are cutaneous and visceral.  The cutaneous type causes skin sores. The visceral type affects internal organs such as the spleen, liver, and bone marrow. People with this form usually have fever, weight loss, and an enlarged spleen and liver. Leishmaniasis is found in parts of about 88 countries. Most of these countries are in the tropics and subtropics. It is possible but very unlikely that you would get this disease in the United States. But you should be aware of it if you are traveling to the Middle East or parts of Central America, South America, Asia, Africa or southern Europe. Treatment is with medicines that contain antimony, a type of metal, or with strong antibiotics. The best way to prevent the disease is to protect yourself from sand fly bites: Stay indoors from dusk to dawn, when sand flies are the most active Wear long pants and long-sleeved shirts when outside Use insect repellent and bed nets as needed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Listeriosis is a foodborne illness caused by Listeria monocytogenes, bacteria found in soil and water.  It can be in a variety of raw foods as well as in processed foods and foods made from unpasteurized milk. Listeria is unlike many other germs because it can grow even in the cold temperature of the refrigerator. Symptoms include fever and chills, headache, upset stomach and vomiting. Treatment is with antibiotics. Anyone can get the illness. But it is most likely to affect pregnant women and unborn babies, older adults, and people with weak immune systems. To reduce your risk: Use precooked and ready-to-eat foods as soon as you can Avoid raw milk and raw milk products Heat ready-to-eat foods and leftovers until they are steaming hot Wash fresh fruits and vegetables Avoid rare meat and refrigerated smoked seafood Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is Lyme disease? Lyme disease is a bacterial infection you get from the bite of an infected tick . At first, Lyme disease usually causes symptoms such as a rash , fever , headache , and fatigue .  But if it is not treated early, the infection can spread to your joints, heart, and nervous system. Prompt treatment can help you recover quickly. What causes Lyme disease? Lyme disease is caused by bacteria. In the United States, this is usually a bacterium called Borrelia burgdorferi . It spreads to humans through the bite of an infected tick. The ticks that spread it are blacklegged ticks (or deer ticks). They are usually found in the: Northeast Mid-Atlantic Upper Midwest Pacific coast, especially northern California These ticks can attach to any part of your body. But they are often found in hard-to-see areas such as your groin, armpits, and scalp. Usually, the tick must be attached to you for more than 24 hours to spread the bacterium to you. Who is more likely to get Lyme disease? Most tick bites happen in the warmer months (April-September), when ticks are most active and people spend more time outdoors. But you can also get bitten during the rest of the year, especially if the temperatures are warmer than usual. Most tick bites happen in the summer months when ticks are most active and people spend more time outdoors. But you can get bitten in the warmer months of early fall, or even late winter if temperatures are unusually high. And if there is a mild winter, ticks may come out earlier than usual. What are the symptoms of Lyme disease? Early symptoms of Lyme disease start between 3 to 30 days after an infected tick bites you. The symptoms can include: A red rash called erythema migrans (EM). Most people with Lyme disease get this rash. It gets bigger over several days and may feel warm. It is usually not painful or itchy. As it starts to get better, parts of it may fade. Sometimes this makes the rash look like a "bull's-eye." Fever Chills Headache Fatigue Muscle and joint aches Swollen lymph nodes ("swollen glands") If the infection is not treated, it can spread to your joints, heart, and nervous system. The symptoms may include: Severe headaches and neck stiffness. More EM rashes on other areas of your body. Facial palsy, which is a weakness in your facial muscles. It can cause drooping on one or both sides of your face. Arthritis with severe joint pain and swelling, especially in your knees and other large joints. Pain that comes and goes in your tendons, muscles, joints, and bones. Heart palpitations, which are feelings that your heart is skipping a beat, fluttering, pounding, or beating too hard or too fast. An irregular heart beat (Lyme carditis). Episodes of dizziness or shortness of breath. Inflammation of the brain and spinal cord. Nerve pain. Shooting pains, numbness, or tingling in the hands or feet. How is Lyme disease diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will consider: Your symptoms How likely it is that you were exposed to infected blacklegged ticks How likely it is that you could have other illnesses that cause similar symptoms The results of any lab tests Most Lyme disease tests check for antibodies made by the body in response to infection. These antibodies can take several weeks to develop. If you are tested right away, it may not show that you have Lyme disease, even if you have it. So you may need to have another test later. What are the treatments for Lyme disease? Lyme disease is treated with antibiotics . The earlier you are treated, the better; it gives you the best chance of fully recovering quickly. After treatment, some patients may still have pain, fatigue, or difficulty thinking that lasts more than 6 months. This is called post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome (PTLDS). Researchers don't know why some people have PTLDS. There is no proven treatment for PTLDS; long-term antibiotics have not been shown to help. However, there are ways to help with the symptoms of PTLDS. If you have been treated for Lyme disease and still feel unwell, contact your health care provider about how to manage your symptoms. Most people do get better with time. But it can take several months before you feel better. Can Lyme disease be prevented? To prevent Lyme disease, you should lower your risk of getting a tick bite: Avoid areas where ticks live, such as grassy, brushy, or wooded areas. If you are hiking, walk in the center of the trail to avoid brush and grass. Use an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent when you go outdoors. They are evaluated to make sure they are safe and effective. Make sure that the repellant has one of these ingredients: DEET, picaridin, IR3535, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or para-menthane-diol. It is important to follow the instructions on the label. Treat your clothing and gear with a repellant containing 0.5% permethrin Wear light-colored protective clothing, so you can easily see any ticks that get on you Wear a long-sleeved shirt and long pants. Also tuck your shirt into your pants and your pant legs into your socks. Check yourself, your children, and your pets daily for ticks. Carefully remove any ticks you find. Take a shower and wash and dry your clothes at high temperatures after being outdoors Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Malaria is a serious disease caused by a parasite. You get it when an infected mosquito bites you. Malaria is a major cause of death worldwide, but it is almost wiped out in the United States. The disease is mostly a problem in developing countries with warm climates. If you travel to these countries, you are at risk. There are four different types of malaria caused by four related parasites. The most deadly type occurs in Africa south of the Sahara Desert. Malaria symptoms include chills, flu-like symptoms, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and jaundice. A blood test can diagnose it. It can be life-threatening. However, you can treat malaria with drugs. The type of drug depends on which kind of malaria you have and where you were infected. Malaria can be prevented. When traveling to areas where malaria is found: See your doctor for medicines that protect you Wear insect repellent with DEET Cover up Sleep under mosquito netting Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Measles is an infectious disease caused by a virus. It spreads easily from person to person. It causes a blotchy red rash. The rash often starts on the head and moves down the body. Other symptoms include: Fever Cough Runny nose Conjunctivitis (pink eye) Feeling achy and run down Tiny white spots inside the mouth Sometimes measles can lead to serious problems. There is no treatment for measles, but the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine can prevent it. "German measles", also known as rubella , is a completely different illness. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Meningitis is inflammation of the thin tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord, called the meninges. There are several types of meningitis. The most common is viral meningitis. You get it when a virus enters the body through the nose or mouth and travels to the brain. Bacterial meningitis is rare but can be deadly. It usually starts with bacteria that cause a cold-like infection. It can cause stroke , hearing loss , and brain damage. It can also harm other organs. Pneumococcal infections and meningococcal infections are the most common causes of bacterial meningitis. Anyone can get meningitis, but it is more common in people with weak immune systems. Meningitis can get serious very quickly. You should get medical care right away if you have: A sudden high fever A severe headache A stiff neck Nausea or vomiting Early treatment can help prevent serious problems, including death. Tests to diagnose meningitis include blood tests, imaging tests, and a spinal tap to test cerebrospinal fluid. Antibiotics can treat bacterial meningitis. Antiviral medicines may help some types of viral meningitis. Other medicines can help treat symptoms. There are vaccines to prevent some of the bacterial infections that cause meningitis. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is meningococcal disease? Meningococcal disease is the name for any illness that is caused by Neisseria meningitidis bacteria (also called meningococcal bacteria). These illnesses are often severe and can sometimes be deadly. They include infections of the lining of the brain and spinal cord ( meningitis ) and in the bloodstream ( sepsis ). Vaccines can help prevent the disease. What causes meningococcal disease? Some people have Neisseria meningitidis , the bacteria that cause the disease, in the back of their nose and throat. They usually have the bacteria but don't get sick. This is called being a "carrier." But sometimes the bacteria can spread to other parts of the body and cause meningococcal disease. The bacteria can spread from person to person through saliva (spit). It usually happens through close or lengthy contact with a person who has it. Close contact can include things like kissing and coughing. You cannot catch the bacteria through casual contact with someone who has the disease. For example, you cannot get it by breathing air where that person has been. Who is more likely to get meningococcal disease? Anyone can get meningococcal disease, but you are more likely to get it if someone you live with has it. You are also more likely to get it if you have direct contact with the saliva of someone who has it (like through kissing). Also, certain groups of people are more likely to get the disease. They include: Children younger than 1 year old. Teens and young adults ages 16 through 23 years old. Adults 65 years and older. People with medical conditions that weaken their immune system , including those with HIV and certain rare immune system diseases. People who either don't have a spleen or have a spleen that does not function well. People who take complement inhibitor. These are immunotherapy medicines that are given to people with certain rare conditions. People who live in crowded settings, such as college dorms or military barracks. People who travel to areas where the disease is more common, such as certain parts of sub-Saharan Africa. What are the symptoms of meningococcal disease? There are different types of meningococcal disease. The most common types are meningitis and septicemia. Both types are very serious and can be deadly in a matter of hours. Meningococcal meningitis is a meningococcal infection of the lining of the brain and spinal cord. The most common symptoms include: Fever Headache Stiff neck It can also cause symptoms such as: Nausea and vomiting Photophobia (your eyes being more sensitive to light) Confusion It may be hard to notice these symptoms in newborns and babies. They can also have different symptoms. They may: Be slow or inactive Be irritable Vomit Feed poorly Have a bulging of the soft spot of their skull Meningococcal septicemia is a meningococcal infection of the bloodstream. It's also called meningococcemia. When someone has this disease, the bacteria enter the bloodstream and multiply. This damages the walls of the blood vessels and causes bleeding into the skin and organs. The symptoms may include: Fever and chills Fatigue Vomiting Cold hands and feet Severe aches or pain in the muscles, joints, chest , or abdomen (belly) Rapid breathing Diarrhea A dark purple rash (in the later stages of the disease) Because it is so serious, you need to seek immediate medical attention if you or your child develops the symptoms of meningococcal disease. How is meningococcal disease diagnosed? The signs and symptoms of meningococcal disease are often similar to those of other illnesses. This can make it hard to diagnose. If your (or your child's) health care provider thinks that you or your child could have meningococcal disease, they will order tests that take samples of blood and/or cerebrospinal fluid (fluid near the spinal cord). They will send the samples to a lab for testing. The testing will include bacteria culture testing , which can identify the specific type of bacteria that is causing the infection. Knowing this can help the provider decide on the best treatment. What are the treatments for meningococcal disease? Certain antibiotics can treat meningococcal disease. It is important that treatment is started as soon as possible. So if the provider thinks you have meningococcal disease, they will give you antibiotics right away (before the test results come back). People with serious disease may need additional treatments, such as: Breathing support Medicines to treat low blood pressure Surgery to remove dead tissue Wound care for parts of the body with damaged skin Some people with meningococcal disease will have long-term health problems and disabilities . These may include: Loss of limb(s) Deafness Nervous system problems Brain damage Even with treatment, 10 to 15 in 100 people will die from the disease. Can meningococcal disease be prevented? The best way to prevent meningococcal disease is to get vaccinated. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends meningococcal vaccination for: All preteens and teens Children at higher risk for meningococcal disease Adults at higher risk for meningococcal disease If you are a close contact of a person with meningococcal disease, you will likely be given antibiotics to prevent you from getting sick. This is called "prophylaxis."  Close contacts include people who are living together. They also include people who had direct contact with the saliva of a person who has the disease (such as from kissing). Although it's rare, you can get meningococcal disease more than once. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is mpox? Mpox, which used to be called monkeypox, is a disease caused by the monkeypox virus. This virus is in the same family of viruses as the smallpox virus. Mpox can be spread between animals and people. It is found regularly in parts of Central and West Africa. The virus that causes it has been found in small rodents, monkeys, and other mammals that live in these areas. Some outbreaks of mpox have affected people in many countries around the world, including the United States. What are the types of monkeypox viruses? There are two types of monkeypox viruses: Clade I is regularly found in Central Africa. It causes more severe illness and deaths than clade II. Clade II is regularly found in West Africa. Infections from clade II are less severe. Most people who get this type will survive. This type is the cause of the global mpox outbreak that started in 2022. How does mpox spread? Mpox spreads in different ways: Through close, personal contact with someone who has the virus: Through direct contact with their rash, scabs, or body fluids By breathing in the virus during prolonged, face-to-face contact During intimate physical contact such as kissing, cuddling, hugging, massage or sex During pregnancy, from the pregnant person to the baby. From touching items (such as clothes, bedding, or towels) that were used by someone who has the virus From infected animals: By being scratched or bitten by the animal By preparing or eating meat or using products from the animal Someone who has mpox can spread it from the time their symptoms start until their rash has fully healed, all scabs have fallen off, and a fresh layer of skin has formed.  This usually takes 2-4 weeks. Researchers have found that some people can spread mpox to others from 1 to 4 days before their symptoms appear. It is not known how often this happens. What are the symptoms of mpox? The symptoms of mpox usually start within 3 weeks from the time you were exposed to the virus. The symptoms may include: A rash with sores that can look like pimples or blisters. It could be on the face, inside the mouth, and on other parts of the body, like the hands, feet, chest, genitals, or anus. It goes through different stages, including scabs, before healing. This can take 2-4 weeks. Fever . Chills. Swollen lymph nodes ("swollen glands"). Exhaustion. Headache . Muscle aches and backache. Respiratory symptoms, such as a sore throat, nasal congestion, or cough . You may have all or only a few symptoms: You may get a rash first, followed by other symptoms You may have flu-like symptoms and then develop a rash 1-4 days later You may only get a rash How is mpox diagnosed? To find out if you have mpox, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history. Will look at your rash. Will take a sample of tissue from one of the sores so it can be tested for the monkeypox virus. May do blood tests to check for monkeypox virus or for antibodies to the virus. Antibodies are proteins that your immune system makes to fight foreign substances such as viruses and bacteria . What are the treatments for mpox? There are no treatments specifically for mpox, but many people get better on their own. Since mpox and smallpox are similar, antiviral medicines that treat smallpox may also help treat mpox. Antiviral medicines may be recommended for people have severe mpox or are at risk of severe mpox, for example because they: Have immune system , for example from HIV or other conditions Are pregnant Are children, especially those under age 1 Have certain active skin conditions that can cause widespread infection, such as eczema , impetigo , or psoriasis If you have mpox, it is recommended that you stay home from the time you have symptoms until your mpox rash has healed and a new layer of skin has formed. It would be best to stay in a separate room from your family members and pets if you can. Can mpox be prevented? JYNNEOS is a vaccine that can help prevent mpox (and smallpox). The vaccine is given in two doses 4 weeks apart. Getting both doses gives the best protection. The vaccine is recommended for people who are at risk of mpox, for example because they: Had or think they could've had exposure to someone with mpox Are a man who has sex with men, a transgender person, or a gender non-binary person who in the last 6 months had: One or more sexually transmitted infections More than one sexual partner Sex at a commercial sex venue (like a sex club or bathhouse) Sex at a large public event where people had spread mpox Had a sex partner who is at risk of mpox Expect to be in any of these situations Are at risk of exposure at work, for example at a lab or healthcare facility Check with your provider to see if the vaccine is recommended for you. There are also other steps you can take to help prevent mpox: Avoid close, skin-to-skin contact with the mpox rash. So, while a person is sick with mpox: Do not touch their rash or scabs Do not kiss, hug, cuddle, or have sex with them Avoid contact with items that were used by someone who has mpox: Do not touch the bedding, towels, or clothing of a person who has mpox Do not share eating utensils or cups with them If you or someone you live with has mpox, clean and disinfect your home Wash your hands often with soap and water or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer, especially after contact with sick people. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

MRSA stands for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.  It causes a staph infection (pronounced "staff infection") that is resistant to several common antibiotics . There are two types of infection. Hospital-associated MRSA happens to people in health care settings. Community-associated MRSA happens to people who have close skin-to-skin contact with others, such as athletes involved in football and wrestling. Infection control is key to stopping MRSA in hospitals. To prevent community-associated MRSA: Practice good hygiene Keep cuts and scrapes clean and covered with a bandage until healed Avoid contact with other people's wounds or bandages Avoid sharing personal items, such as towels, washcloths, razors, or clothes Wash soiled sheets, towels, and clothes in hot water with bleach and dry in a hot dryer If a wound appears to be infected, see a health care provider. Treatments may include draining the infection and antibiotics.

Mumps is an illness caused by the mumps virus. It starts with: Fever Headache Muscle aches Tiredness Loss of appetite After that, the salivary glands under the ears or jaw become swollen and tender. The swelling can be on one or both sides of the face.  Symptoms last 7 to 10 days. Serious complications are rare. You can catch mumps by being with another person who has it.  There is no treatment for mumps, but the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine can prevent it. Before the routine vaccination program in the United States, mumps was a common illness in infants, children and young adults. Now it is a rare disease in the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)? Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a serious, long-term illness that affects many body systems. Another name for it is chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). ME/CFS can often make you unable to do your usual activities. Sometimes you may not even be able to get out of bed. What causes myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)? Researchers don't yet know what causes ME/CFS. There may be more than one potential cause. It is also possible that two or more triggers might work together to cause the illness. Researchers are studying many possible causes, including: Infections Immune system changes Physical or emotional stress Changes in the way cells in the body get their energy Genetics; the illness can sometimes run in families Who is more likely to develop myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)? Anyone can get ME/CFS, but it is most common in people between 40 and 60 years old. Adult women are more likely to develop it than adult men. What are the symptoms of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)? The primary, or core, symptoms of ME/CFS are: Not being able to do activities that you used to do before the illness, along with severe fatigue. The fatigue must last six months or longer, and it is not improved by rest. Post-exertional malaise (PEM), which means that your symptoms get worse after any physical or mental activity. Sleep problems . Along with the primary symptoms, to be diagnosed with ME/CFS, you need to have one or both of these symptoms: Problems with thinking and memory . Worsening of symptoms while standing or sitting upright. This is called orthostatic intolerance. It can cause you to feel lightheaded, dizzy , weak, or faint while standing or sitting up. Some of the other symptoms that ME/CFS can cause include: Pain , including muscle pain, joint pain, and headaches Sore throat Tender lymph nodes (glands) in the neck or armpits Digestive issues, like irritable bowel syndrome Chills and night sweats Allergies and sensitivities to foods, odors, chemicals, light, or noise ME/CFS can be unpredictable. Your symptoms may come and go. They may change over time; sometimes they might get better, and other times they may get worse. How is myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) diagnosed? ME/CFS can be difficult to diagnose. There is no specific test for ME/CFS, and other illnesses can cause similar symptoms. Your health care provider has to rule out other diseases before making a diagnosis of ME/CFS. Your provider will do a thorough medical exam, which will include: Asking about your medical history and your family's medical history. Asking about your current illness, including your symptoms.  Some questions they may ask could include how often you have symptoms, how bad they are, how long they have lasted, and how they affect your life. Thorough physical and mental status exams. Blood, urine, or other tests to check for other illnesses which could be causing your symptoms. Your provider may also ask you to see a specialist to check for other conditions which can cause similar symptoms. What are the treatments for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)? There is no cure or approved treatment for ME/CFS, but you may be able to treat or manage some of your symptoms. You, your family, and your provider should work together to decide on a plan. You should figure out which symptom causes you the most problems and try to treat that first. For example, if sleep problems affect you the most, you might first try using good sleep habits . If those do not help, you may need to take medicines or see a sleep specialist. Strategies such as learning new ways to manage activity can also be helpful. You need to make sure that you do not "push and crash." This can happen when you feel better, do too much, and then get worse again. When you have ME/CFS, it can be hard to help develop a treatment plan. It can also be difficult to  try to take care of yourself.  So it's important that you have support from family members and friends. There are also various resources and strategies that might be helpful to you, such as: Getting counseling to help you cope with the illness and its impact on your life. Eating a healthy diet. Nutritional supplements, if your provider suggests them. Complementary therapies such as meditation, gentle massage, or relaxation therapy. Make sure to talk to your provider before you try any new treatments. Some treatments that are promoted as cures for ME/CFS are unproven, often costly, and could be dangerous. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Mycobacteria are a type of germ. There are many different kinds. The most common one causes tuberculosis . Another one causes leprosy. Still others cause infections that are called atypical mycobacterial infections.  They aren't "typical" because they don't cause tuberculosis. But they can still harm people, especially people with other problems that affect their immunity, such as AIDS. Sometimes you can have these infections with no symptoms at all. At other times, they can cause lung symptoms similar to tuberculosis: Cough Weight loss Coughing up blood or mucus Weakness or fatigue Fever and chills Night sweats Lack of appetite and weight loss Medicines can treat these infections, but often more than one is needed to cure the infection.

Noroviruses are a group of related viruses. Infection with these viruses causes an illness called gastroenteritis , an inflammation of the stomach and intestines.  It can spread from person to person, or through contaminated food or water.  You can also get it if you touch a contaminated surface. Norovirus can be serious, especially for young children and older adults. The most common symptoms of norovirus infection are: Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting Stomach pain Other symptoms may include fever, headache or body aches. Treatment includes bed rest and lots of liquids to prevent dehydration . There is no specific medicine to treat norovirus infections. Proper hand washing and safe food preparation may help prevent infections. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Parasites are living things that use other living things - like your body - for food and a place to live. You can get them from contaminated food or water, a bug bite, or sexual contact. Some parasitic diseases are easily treated and some are not. Parasites range in size from tiny, one-celled organisms called protozoa to worms that can be seen with the naked eye. Some parasitic diseases occur in the United States. Contaminated water supplies can lead to Giardia infections . Cats can transmit toxoplasmosis , which is dangerous for pregnant women.  Others, like malaria , are common in other 
parts of the world. If you are traveling , it's important to drink only water you know is safe. Prevention is especially important. There are no vaccines for parasitic diseases. Some medicines are available to treat parasitic infections.

Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection and inflammation of the uterus, ovaries, and other female reproductive organs. It causes scarring in these organs. This can lead to infertility, ectopic pregnancy, pelvic pain, abscesses, and other serious problems. PID is the most common preventable cause of infertility in the United States. Gonorrhea and chlamydia , two sexually transmitted infections (STIs), are the most common causes of PID. Other bacteria can also cause it. You are at greater risk if you: Are sexually active and younger than 25 Have more than one sex partner Douche Some women have no symptoms. Others have pain in the lower abdomen, fever, smelly vaginal discharge, irregular bleeding, and pain during intercourse or urination. Doctors diagnose PID with a physical exam, lab tests, and imaging tests. Antibiotics can cure PID.  Early treatment is important. Waiting too long increases the risk of infertility. NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Conjunctivitis is the medical name for pink eye. It involves inflammation of the outer layer of the eye and inside of the eyelid. It can cause swelling, itching, burning, discharge, and redness. Causes include: Bacterial or viral infection Allergies Substances that cause irritation Contact lens products, eye drops, or eye ointments Pink eye usually does not affect vision. Infectious pink eye can easily spread from one person to another. The infection will clear in most cases without medical care, but bacterial pink eye needs treatment with antibiotic eye drops or ointment. NIH: National Eye Institute

Pinworms are small parasites that can live in the colon and rectum.   You get them when you swallow their eggs. The eggs hatch inside your intestines. While you sleep, the female pinworms leave the intestines through the anus and  lay eggs on nearby skin. Pinworms spread easily. When people who are infected touch their anus, the eggs attach to their fingertips.  They can spread the eggs to others directly through their hands, or through contaminated clothing, bedding, food, or other articles. The eggs can live on household surfaces for up to 2 weeks. The infection is more common in children. Many people have no symptoms at all. Some people feel itching around the anus or vagina. The itching may become intense, interfere with sleep, and make you irritable. Your health care provider can diagnose pinworm infection by finding the eggs. A common way to collect the eggs is with a sticky piece of clear tape. Mild infections may not need treatment.  If you do need medicine, everyone in the household should take it. To prevent becoming infected or reinfected with pinworms: Bathe after waking up Wash your pajamas and bed sheets often Wash your hands regularly, especially after using the bathroom or changing diapers Change your underwear every day Avoid nail biting Avoid scratching the anal area NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Plague is an infection caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. The bacteria are found mainly in rats and in the fleas that feed on them. People and other animals can get plague from rat or flea bites. In the past, plague destroyed entire civilizations. Today plague is uncommon, due to better living conditions and antibiotics. There are three forms of plague: Bubonic plague causes the tonsils, adenoids, spleen, and thymus to become inflamed.  Symptoms include fever, aches, chills, and tender lymph glands. In septicemic plague, bacteria multiply in the blood. It causes fever, chills, shock, and bleeding under the skin or other organs. Pneumonic plague is the most serious form. Bacteria enter the lungs and cause pneumonia. People with the infection can spread this form to others. This type could be a bioterror agent. Lab tests can diagnose plague. Treatment is a strong antibiotic. There is no vaccine.

Pneumococci are a type of streptococcus bacteria. The bacteria spread through contact with people who are ill or by healthy people who carry the bacteria in the back of their nose. Pneumococcal infections can be mild or severe. The most common types of infections are: Ear infections Sinus infections Pneumonia Sepsis Meningitis How the diagnosis is made depends upon where the infection is. Your doctor will do a physical exam and ask about your medical history.  Possible tests may include blood, imaging, or lab tests. Treatment is with antibiotics. Vaccines can prevent pneumococcal infections. There are two vaccines. One is for infants and young children.  The other is for people at high risk, including those who are over 65 years old, have chronic illnesses or weak immune systems, smoke, have asthma, or live in long-term care facilities. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is Pneumocystis jirovecii ? Pneumocystis jirovecii is a fungus that is common throughout the world. Many people have been exposed to it as children. Some people have the fungus in their lungs. If you are healthy, it usually will not make you sick. But it can make you sick if you have a weakened immune system , for example if you: Have HIV Have an autoimmune disease Have cancer Have a chronic (long-lasting) lung disease Had an organ or bone marrow transplant Take medicines which weaken your immune system, such as chemotherapy and steroids How does Pneumocystis jirovecii spread? Pneumocystis jirovecii can spread from person to person through the air. You can spread it to others even if it isn't making you sick. What is pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP)? The most common type of infection that Pneumocystis jirovecii causes is pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP). Pneumonia is an infection in one or both of the lungs. It causes the air sacs of the lungs to fill up with fluid or pus. What are the symptoms of pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP)? The symptoms of PCP can develop over several days or weeks. They may include: Fever Cough Trouble breathing Chest pain Chills Fatigue Contact your healthcare provider if you have symptoms that you think are related to PCP. Since PCP can be life-threatening, it's important to get early treatment. How is pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) diagnosed? To find out if you have PCP, your provider will take a sample of fluid or tissue from your lungs. You may cough up the sample (called sputum), have fluid collected during a bronchoalveolar lavage , or have tissue taken with a biopsy . They will send the sample to the lab to check for Pneumocystis . What are the treatments for pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP)? The treatment for PCP is with antibiotics , either by mouth or intravenously (by IV). You need to take them for about 3 weeks. If you have a severe case of PCP, you might need treatment in the hospital. Can pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) be prevented? There is no vaccine to prevent PCP. Some people who are at high risk of getting PCP may need to take antibiotics to prevent it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is pneumonia? Pneumonia is an infection in one or both of your lungs. It causes the air sacs of your lungs to fill up with fluid or pus. Pneumonia can range from mild to severe, depending on what caused it, your age, and your overall health. What causes pneumonia? Bacterial , viral , and fungal infections can cause pneumonia. Bacteria are the most common cause. Bacterial pneumonia can occur on its own. It can also develop after you've had certain viral infections such as a cold or the flu . Several different types of bacteria can cause pneumonia, including: Streptococcus pneumoniae Legionella pneumophila ; this type of pneumonia is often called Legionnaires' disease Mycoplasma pneumoniae Chlamydia pneumoniae Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) Viruses that infect the respiratory tract may cause pneumonia. Viral pneumonia is often mild and goes away on its own within a few weeks. But sometimes it is serious enough that you need to get treatment in a hospital. If you have viral pneumonia, you are at risk of also getting bacterial pneumonia. The different viruses that can cause pneumonia include: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) Some common cold and flu viruses SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 Fungal pneumonia is more common in people who have chronic health problems or weakened immune systems . Some of the types include: Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) Valley fever (Coccidioidomycosis) Histoplasmosis Cryptococcal pneumonia Aspiration can also cause pneumonia. It can happen when you aspirate (accidentally breathe in) food or fluid into the lungs. If you are not able to cough out the food or fluid, it may cause an infection. Who is more likely to develop pneumonia? Anyone can develop pneumonia, but certain factors can increase your risk: Age; the risk is higher for children who are age 2 and under and adults age 65 and older. Exposure to certain chemicals, pollutants, or toxic fumes. Lifestyle habits, such as smoking , heavy alcohol use , and malnourishment . Being in a hospital, especially if you are in the ICU . Being sedated and/or on a ventilator raises the risk even more. Having a lung disease . Having a weakened immune system. Have trouble coughing or swallowing , from a stroke or other condition. Recently having been sick with a cold or the flu. Other chronic (long-lasting) health conditions, including diabetes , heart failure , sickle cell disease , liver disease , and kidney disease . What are the symptoms of pneumonia? The symptoms of pneumonia can range from mild to severe and include: Fever Chills Cough, usually with phlegm (a type of thick mucus made in your lungs) Shortness of breath Chest pain when you breathe or cough Nausea and/or vomiting Diarrhea The symptoms can vary for different groups. Newborns and infants may not show any signs of the infection. Others may vomit and have a fever and cough. They might seem sick, with no energy, or be restless. Older adults and people who have serious illnesses or weak immune systems may have fewer and milder symptoms. They may even have a lower-than-normal temperature. Older adults who have pneumonia sometimes may feel weak or suddenly get confused. What other problems can pneumonia cause? Sometimes pneumonia can cause serious complications such as: Bacteremia, which happens when the bacteria move into the bloodstream. It is serious and can lead to septic shock . Lung abscesses , which are collections of pus in cavities of the lungs. Pleural disorders , which are conditions that affect the pleura. The pleura is the tissue that covers the outside of the lungs and lines the inside of your chest cavity. Kidney failure . Respiratory failure . How is pneumonia diagnosed? Sometimes pneumonia can be hard to diagnose. This is because it can cause some of the same symptoms as a cold or the flu. It may take time for you to realize that you have a more serious condition. To find out if you have pneumonia, your health care provider: Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Will do a physical exam, which includes listening to your lungs with a stethoscope May order various tests, such as: A chest x-ray Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC) to see if your immune system is actively fighting an infection A blood culture to find out whether you have a bacterial infection that has spread to your bloodstream If you are in the hospital, have serious symptoms, are older, or have other health problems, you may also have more tests, such as: Sputum test , which checks for bacteria in a sample of your sputum (mucus that is brought up from the lungs by coughing). Chest CT scan to see how much of your lungs are affected. It may also show if you have complications such as lung abscesses or pleural effusions (a buildup of fluid in the pleural space). Pleural fluid culture , which checks for bacteria in a fluid sample that was taken from the pleural space. Pulse oximetry or blood oxygen level test, to check how much oxygen is in your blood. Bronchoscopy, a procedure used to look inside your lungs' airways. What are the treatments for pneumonia? Treatment for pneumonia depends on the type of pneumonia, which germ is causing it, and how severe it is: Antibiotics treat bacterial pneumonia and some types of fungal pneumonia. They do not work for viral pneumonia. In some cases, your provider may prescribe antiviral medicines for viral pneumonia. Antifungal medicines treat other types of fungal pneumonia. You may need to be treated in a hospital if your symptoms are severe or if you are at risk for complications. While there, you may get additional treatments. For example, if your blood oxygen level is low, you may receive oxygen therapy . It may take time to recover from pneumonia. Some people feel better within a week. For other people, it can take a month or more. Can pneumonia be prevented? Vaccines can help prevent pneumonia caused by pneumococcal bacteria or the flu virus . Washing your hands often , not smoking, and having a healthy lifestyle may also help prevent pneumonia. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is polio? Polio, or poliomyelitis, is a disease that spreads from person to person. It is caused by the poliovirus. The virus attacks the nervous system. In serious cases, it can cause paralysis (where you can't move parts of the body). The paralysis may be lifelong and can sometimes be life-threatening. Because of vaccines, polio is rare in the United States. But polio does occur in some parts of the world, and travelers can spread the virus. How does polio spread? The poliovirus is very contagious. It spreads through contact with: The stool (poop) of person who has the infection Droplets from a sneeze or cough of someone who has the infection This contact can happen if: You get contaminated stool or droplets on your hands and then touch your mouth A child puts contaminated toys or other objects into their mouth You share food or utensils with someone who has the infection People who have the infection can spread it to others just before and up to several weeks after the symptoms appear. People who don't have symptoms can still spread the virus to others and make them sick. Who is more likely to develop polio? Polio mainly affects children under age 5. But people of any age (including adults) who are unvaccinated are at risk of developing polio. People who live in or travel to areas where there is polio are more likely to get polio. What are the symptoms of polio? Most people who get infected with poliovirus do not have any symptoms. But one out of four people who get polio will have flu-like symptoms. These symptoms usually last 2 to 5 days, and they include: Sore throat Fever Fatigue Nausea Headache Stomach pain In rare cases, polio can be very serious. It can lead to: Meningitis , an infection of the covering of your spinal cord and/or brain. Weakness or paralysis in your arms, legs, or both. This paralysis or weakness can last a lifetime. It is possible for the paralysis to become life-threatening if it affects the muscles that you use to breathe. Post-polio syndrome (PPS), which happens later in life. What is post-polio syndrome (PPS)? Post-polio syndrome (PPS) is a condition that affects polio survivors many years after they recovered from polio. It usually happens 15-40 years later. It is not contagious. People who get PPS start having new weakening in muscles that were previously affected by the polio infection.  Symptoms may range from mild to serious. The symptoms of PPS include: Muscle weakness Muscle atrophy (wasting away of muscles) Loss of muscle function Mental and physical fatigue Joint pain Curving of the spine ( scoliosis ) PPS is rarely life-threatening, but the symptoms can interfere with your daily life. How is polio diagnosed? If you think you or someone in your family has symptoms of polio, call your healthcare provider right away or go to an emergency room. To find out if you or your child has polio, the provider: Will do a physical exam. Will take a detailed medical history, including your vaccination history and history of any recent travel. Will collect samples of body fluids, such as stool, saliva, blood, urine, and spinal fluid. Poliovirus is most likely to be detected in stool specimens. May do an MRI to look at pictures of the spinal cord. What are the treatments for polio and post-polio syndrome (PPS)? There is no cure or specific treatment for polio. For a mild case, getting rest and drinking plenty of liquids may help with some of the symptoms. If the polio is more serious, you or your child may need: Physical or occupational therapy to help with arm or leg weakness. The earlier therapy is started, the better. Pain relievers to help with pain and treat fever. If your child is sick, do not give them aspirin unless their provider tells you to. A ventilator to help with breathing if the breathing muscles are weak or paralyzed. There is no cure for PPS. Treatments may help you manage your symptoms. They include: Non-fatiguing exercises (exercises that do not cause pain or fatigue that lasts more than 10 minutes). These exercises may improve muscle strength and reduce tiredness. Your provider can help you figure out which exercises are best for you. Mobility aids . Ventilation equipment. Lifestyle changes, such as eating a healthy diet, getting enough sleep, and not smoking. Can polio be prevented? There are two types of vaccine that can prevent polio: Inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) given as an injection in the leg or arm, depending on how old you are. Since 2000, this has been the only polio vaccine used in the United States. Oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) is given as drops in the mouth. It is still used throughout much of the world. Children in the United States get four doses of PV as part of their routine childhood immunizations . Most adults in the United States were vaccinated against polio as children. There is a one-time IPV booster. It may be given to adults who have completed their polio vaccinations but are at higher risk of contact with poliovirus. You may be at higher risk if you are: Traveling to a country where the risk of getting polio is greater Working in a laboratory or healthcare setting and handling samples that might contain polioviruses A healthcare worker who has contact with patients who could have polio Another way to help prevent the spread of polio is to wash your hands often with soap and water. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers will not kill poliovirus. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are post-COVID conditions (long COVID)? COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is an illness caused by a virus. Many people get better within a few days or weeks after being infected with the virus. But others have post-COVID conditions. They may: Have symptoms that linger for weeks, months, or even years Seem to recover from COVID-19 but then see their symptoms return Develop new symptoms or new health conditions within a few months of having COVID-19 There are several other names for post-COVID conditions. It is often called long COVID. But it can also be called long-haul COVID, long-term effects of COVID, chronic COVID, post-acute COVID-19, and post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 (PASC). Who is more likely to develop post-COVID conditions (long COVID)? Anyone who had COVID-19, whether it was severe or mild, can have long-lasting symptoms. But you are at higher risk of post-COVID conditions if you: Had severe COVID-19 illness, especially if you were hospitalized or needed intensive care. Had underlying health conditions before you got COVID-19. Did not get a COVID-19 vaccine . Had multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS) during or after COVID-19. MIS is a rare but serious condition in which different body parts become inflamed. What are the symptoms of post-COVID conditions (long COVID)? Post-COVID conditions do not affect everyone the same way. They can cause various types and combinations of symptoms in different people. The symptoms may affect different parts of the body, for example: General symptoms, such as fatigue and fever Respiratory symptoms, such as trouble breathing and cough Heart symptoms, such as chest pain and palpitations Neurologic symptoms such as trouble thinking and concentrating ("brain fog"), headaches , and sleep problems Digestive symptoms such as diarrhea and stomach pain Some people may have a wide variety of symptoms that are similar to those of other conditions, such as myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Most people's symptoms slowly improve over time. But for some people, the symptoms can last weeks, months, or longer. Sometimes the symptoms are severe enough to result in disability . How are post-COVID conditions (long COVID) diagnosed? There is no specific test for post-COVID conditions. To find out if you have a post-COVID condition, your provider: Will ask about your medical history. This includes asking if you have had a diagnosis of COVID-19, either based on a positive test, symptoms, or exposure. Will do a physical exam. May order blood and imaging tests. Some of symptoms of post-COVID conditions may be hard to explain. The results of blood and imaging tests may be normal. And people who have unexplained symptoms may sometimes be misunderstood by their providers. So it can take some time to get a diagnosis. What are the treatments for post-COVID conditions (long COVID)? There is no specific treatment for post-COVID conditions yet. You and your provider can work together to create a personal care plan to manage your symptoms and improve your quality of life. Can post-COVID conditions (long COVID) be prevented? The best way to prevent post-COVID conditions is to avoid getting COVID-19. Staying up to date with vaccines (including boosters) against COVID-19 can help prevent COVID-19 infection and protect against severe illness.

What are pubic lice? Pubic lice (also called crabs) are tiny insects which usually live in the pubic or genital area of humans. They are also sometimes found on other coarse body hair, such as hair on the legs, armpits, mustache, beard, eyebrows, or eyelashes. Pubic lice on the eyebrows or eyelashes of children or teens may be a sign of sexual exposure or abuse . Pubic lice are parasites, and they need to feed on human blood to survive. They are one of the three types of lice that live on humans. The other two types are head lice and body lice . Each type of lice is different, and getting one type does not mean that you will get another type. How do pubic lice spread? Pubic lice move by crawling, because they cannot hop or fly. They usually spread through sexual contact. Occasionally, they may spread through physical contact with a person who has pubic lice, or through contact with clothing, beds, bed linens, or towels that were used by a person with pubic lice. You cannot get pubic lice from animals. Who is at risk for pubic lice? Since they spread mainly through sexual contact, pubic lice are most common in adults. What are the symptoms of pubic lice? The most common symptom of pubic lice is intense itching in the genital area. You may also see nits (lice eggs) or crawling lice. How do you know if you have pubic lice? A diagnosis of a pubic lice usually comes from seeing a louse or nit. But lice and nits can be difficult to find because there may be only a few present. Also, they often attach themselves to more than one hair, and they do not crawl as quickly as head and body lice. Sometimes it takes a magnifying lens to see the lice or nits. People who have pubic lice should also be checked for other sexually transmitted infections (STIs), and their sexual partners should also be checked for pubic lice. What are the treatments for pubic lice? The main treatment for pubic lice is a lice-killing lotion. Options include a lotion that contains permethrin or a mousse containing pyrethrins and piperonyl butoxide. These products are available over-the-counter without a prescription. They are safe and effective when you use them according to the instructions. Usually one treatment will get rid of the lice. If not, you may need another treatment after 9-10 days. There are other lice-killing medicines that are available with a prescription from your health care provider. You should also wash your clothes, bedding, and towels with hot water, and dry them using the hot cycle of the dryer. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Rabies is a deadly animal disease caused by a virus. It can happen in wild animals, including raccoons, skunks, bats and foxes, or in dogs, cats or farm animals. People get it from the bite of an infected animal. In people, symptoms of rabies include fever, headache and fatigue, then confusion, hallucinations and paralysis. Once the symptoms begin, the disease is usually fatal. A series of shots can prevent rabies in people exposed to the virus. You need to get them right away. If an animal bites you, wash the wound well; then get medical care. To help prevent rabies: Vaccinate your pet. Rabies vaccines are available for dogs, cats and farm animals Don't let pets roam Don't approach stray animals. Animals with rabies might be aggressive and vicious, or tired and weak Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)? Respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, is a common respiratory virus. It usually causes mild, cold-like symptoms. But it can cause serious lung infections, especially in infants, older adults, and people with serious medical problems. How is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) spread? RSV spreads from person to person through: The air by coughing and sneezing Direct contact, such as kissing the face of a child who has RSV Touching an object or surface with the virus on it, then touching your mouth, nose, or eyes before washing your hands People who have an RSV infection are usually contagious for 3 to 8 days. But sometimes infants and people with weakened immune systems can continue to spread the virus for as long as 4 weeks. Who is at risk for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? RSV can affect people of all ages. But it is very common in small children; nearly all children become infected with RSV by age 2. In the United States, RSV infections usually occur during RSV season, which is usually fall through spring. Certain people are at higher risk of having a severe RSV infection: Infants Older adults, especially those ages 65 and older People with chronic medical conditions such as heart or lung disease People with weakened immune systems What are the symptoms of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? The symptoms of RSV infection usually start about 4 to 6 days after infection. They include: Runny nose Decrease in appetite Cough Sneezing Fever Wheezing These symptoms usually appear in stages instead of all at once. In very young infants, the only symptoms may be irritability, decreased activity, and trouble breathing. RSV can also cause more severe infections, especially in people at high risk. These infections include bronchiolitis, an inflammation of the small airways in the lung, and pneumonia , an infection of the lungs. How are respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, including asking about symptoms. A physical exam. A lab test of nasal fluid or another respiratory specimen to check for RSV. This is usually done for people with severe infection. Tests to check for complications in people with severe infection. The tests may include a chest x-ray and blood and urine tests. What are the treatments for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? There is no specific treatment for RSV infection. Most infections go away on their own in a week or two. Over-the-counter pain relievers can help with the fever and pain. However, do not give aspirin to children. And do not give cough medicine to children under four. It is also important to get enough fluids to prevent dehydration . Some people with severe infection may need to be hospitalized. There, they might get oxygen , a breathing tube, or a ventilator. Can respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections be prevented? There are some vaccines to protect against RVS illness. Two of them are for people ages 60 and older. If you are in this age group, talk to your provider about whether an RSV vaccine would be right for you. There is also a vaccine is for pregnant people. It is given between 32 and 36 weeks of pregnancy. It helps protect their newborn babies from RSV illness for the first 6 months of life. There are two medicines to help prevent severe RSV illness in babies and young children. These medicines may help prevent severe RSV illness, but they can't cure or treat children who already have RSV. And they cannot prevent an RSV infection. Both medicines are given by injections (shots). One medicine is given to infants who are younger than 8 months during their first RSV season. This includes infants who are born during RSV season. This medicine may also be given to some children between the ages of 8 and 19 months who are at high risk for severe RSV illness. For example, they might be at high risk because they: Were born prematurely Have congenital heart disease Have chronic lung disease Have a weakened immune system The other medicine is given monthly during RSV season. It is for children under 24 months of age who are at high risk for severe RSV illness. There are also some steps you can take to lower your risk of getting or spreading an RSV infection, including: Washing your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds Avoiding touching your face, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact, such as kissing, shaking hands, and sharing cups and eating utensils, with others if you are sick or they are sick Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue. Then throw away the tissue and wash your hands Staying home when sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Rotavirus is a virus that causes gastroenteritis . Symptoms include severe diarrhea , vomiting, fever, and dehydration. Almost all children in the U.S. are likely to be infected with rotavirus before their 5th birthday. Infections happen most often in the winter and spring. It is very easy for children with the virus to spread it to other children and sometimes to adults. Once a child gets the virus, it takes about two days to become sick. Vomiting and diarrhea may last from three to eight days. There is no medicine to treat it. To prevent dehydration, have your child drink plenty of liquids. Your health care provider may recommend oral rehydration drinks. Some children need to go to the hospital for IV fluids. Two vaccines against rotavirus infections are available. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Rubella is an infection caused by a virus. It is usually mild with fever and a rash. About half of the people who get rubella do not have symptoms. If you do get them, symptoms may include: A rash that starts on the face and spreads to the body Mild fever Aching joints, especially in young women Swollen glands Rubella is most dangerous for a pregnant woman's baby. It can cause miscarriage or birth defects. Rubella spreads when an infected person coughs or sneezes. People without symptoms can still spread it. There is no treatment, but the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine can prevent it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Salmonella is the name of a group of bacteria. In the United States, it is a common cause of foodborne illness .  
Salmonella occurs in raw poultry, eggs, beef, and sometimes on unwashed fruit and vegetables. You also can get infected after handling pets, especially reptiles like snakes, turtles, and lizards. Symptoms include: Fever Diarrhea Abdominal cramps Headache Possible nausea, vomiting , and loss of appetite Symptoms usually last 4-7 days. Your health care provider diagnoses the infection with a stool test. Most people get better without treatment.  Infection can be more serious in older adults, infants, and people with chronic health problems. If Salmonella gets into the bloodstream, it can be serious.  The usual treatment is antibiotics. Typhoid fever, a more serious disease caused by Salmonella, is not common in the United States. It frequently occurs in developing countries. NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Scabies is an itchy skin condition caused by the microscopic mite Sarcoptes scabei. It is common all over the world, and can affect anyone. Scabies spreads quickly in crowded conditions where there is frequent skin-to-skin contact between people. Hospitals, child-care centers, and nursing homes are examples. Scabies can easily infect sex partners and other household members. Sharing clothes, towels, and bedding can sometimes spread scabies.  This can happen much more easily when the infested person has crusted scabies. You cannot get scabies from a pet. Pets get a different mite infection called mange. Symptoms are: Pimple-like irritations or a rash Intense itching, especially at night Sores caused by scratching Your health care provider diagnoses scabies by looking at the skin rash and finding burrows in the skin. Several lotions are available to treat scabies. The infected person's clothes, bedding and towels should be washed in hot water and dried in a hot dryer. Treatment is also recommended for household members and sexual partners. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is sepsis? Sepsis is your body's overactive and extreme response to an infection . Sepsis is a life-threatening medical emergency. Without quick treatment, it can lead to tissue damage, organ failure, and even death. What causes sepsis? Sepsis happens when an infection you already have triggers a chain reaction throughout your body. Bacterial infections are the most common cause, but other types of infections can also cause it. The infections are often in the lungs, stomach, kidneys, or bladder. It's possible for sepsis to begin with a small cut that gets infected or with an infection that develops after surgery. Sometimes, sepsis can occur in people who didn't even know that they had an infection. Who is more likely to develop sepsis? Anyone with an infection could get sepsis. But certain people are more likely to develop it: Adults 65 or older People with chronic (long-lasting) conditions, such as diabetes , lung disease , cancer , and kidney disease People with weakened immune systems Pregnant women Children younger than one What are the symptoms of sepsis? Sepsis can cause one or more of these symptoms: Rapid breathing and heart rate Shortness of breath Confusion or disorientation Extreme pain or discomfort Fever , shivering, or feeling very cold Clammy or sweaty skin It's important to get medical care right away if you think you might have sepsis or if your infection is not getting better or is getting worse. What other problems can sepsis cause? Severe cases of sepsis can lead to septic shock, where your blood pressure drops to a dangerous level and multiple organs can fail. How is sepsis diagnosed? To find out if you have sepsis, your health care provider: Will take your medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Will do a physical exam, which includes checking vital signs (your temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing) Will likely order lab tests that check for signs of infection or organ damage May order imaging tests such as an x-ray or a CT scan to find the location of the infection Many of the signs and symptoms of sepsis can also be caused by other medical conditions. This may make sepsis hard to diagnose in its early stages. What are the treatments for sepsis? It is very important to get treatment right away. Treatment usually includes: Antibiotics . Maintaining blood flow to organs. This may involve getting oxygen and intravenous (IV) fluids. Treating the source of the infection. If needed, medicines to increase blood pressure. In serious cases, you might need kidney dialysis or a breathing tube. Some people need surgery to remove tissue damaged by the infection. Can sepsis be prevented? To prevent sepsis, you should try to prevent getting an infection: Take good care of any chronic health conditions that you have Get recommended vaccines Practice good hygiene , such as handwashing Keep cuts clean and covered until healed NIH: National Institute of General Medical SciencesCenters for Disease Control and Prevention

What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are infections that are passed from one person to another through sexual contact. They are usually spread during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. But sometimes they can spread through other sexual contact involving the penis, vagina, mouth, or anus. This is because some STIs, like herpes and HPV, are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Some STIs can be passed from a pregnant person to the baby, either during pregnancy or when giving birth. Other ways that some STIs may be spread include during breastfeeding , through blood transfusions , or by sharing needles. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis What causes sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs can be caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites . Who is affected by sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Most STIs affect both men and women, but in many cases the health problems they cause can be more severe for 
women. If an STI is passed to a baby, it can cause serious health problems. What are the symptoms of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs don't always cause symptoms or may only cause mild symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection and not know it. And even without symptoms, STIs can still be harmful and may be passed on during sex. If there are symptoms, they could include: Unusual discharge from the penis or vagina Sores or warts on the genital area Painful or frequent urination (peeing) Itching and redness in the genital area Blisters or sores in or around the mouth Abnormal vaginal odor Anal itching, soreness, or bleeding Abdominal (belly) pain Fever How are sexually transmitted infections (STIs) diagnosed? If you are sexually active, you should talk to your health care provider about your risk for STIs and whether you need to be tested. This is especially important since many STIs do not usually cause symptoms. Some STIs may be diagnosed during a physical exam or through STI testing . Some tests involve a microscopic examination of a sore or fluid swabbed from the vagina, penis, or anus. Blood tests can diagnose other types of STIs. What are the treatments for sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Antibiotics can treat STIs that are caused by bacteria or parasites. There is no cure for STIs caused by viruses, but antiviral medicines can often help with the symptoms and lower your risk of spreading the infection. It's important to get treatment if you have an STI. Some types of STIs can cause serious health problems if they are not treated. Can sexually transmitted infections (STIs) be prevented? The surest way to protect yourself against STIs is to not have sex. If you do decide to have sex, you can lower your risk of getting an STI by: Having you and your partner tested for STIs before having sex. Using a condom every time you have sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading STIs. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Reducing your number of sex partners. You might even consider "mutual monogamy" with just one partner. This means that you agree to be sexually active only with them, and they agree to be sexually active only with you. But first you should both get tested to make sure that you don't already have an STI. Getting vaccinated against HPV and hepatitis B .

What is shingles? Shingles (herpes zoster) is an infection that causes a painful rash. It is caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). This is the same virus that causes chickenpox . After you have chickenpox, the virus stays in your body. It may not cause problems for many years. But as you get older, the virus may become active again and cause shingles. Is shingles contagious? Shingles is not contagious. You cannot get shingles from someone else. But you can catch chickenpox from someone with shingles if you have direct contact with fluid from their shingles rash. The risk of spreading the virus is low if the shingles rash is kept covered. People with shingles cannot spread the virus before their rash blisters appear or after the rash crusts. Who is at risk for shingles? Anyone who has had chickenpox can get shingles. But the risk of shingles goes up as you get older. Shingles is most common in people over age 50. People with weakened immune systems are at higher risk of getting shingles. This includes those who: Have immune system diseases such as HIV Have certain cancers Take medicines that weaken their immune system, such as steroids and medicines you take after organ transplant Your immune system may be weaker when you have an infection or are stressed. This can raise your risk of shingles. It is rare, but possible, to get shingles more than once. What are the symptoms of shingles? Early signs of shingles include burning or shooting pain and tingling or itching. It is usually on one side of the body or face. The pain can be mild to severe. Up to several days later, you will get a rash. It consists of blisters that typically scab over in 7 to 10 days. The rash is usually a single stripe around either the left or the right side of the body. In other cases, the rash is only on one side of the face. In rare cases (usually among people with weakened immune systems), the rash may be more widespread. It might look similar to a chickenpox rash. Some people may also have other symptoms: Fever Headache Chills Upset stomach What other problems can shingles cause? Shingles can cause other problems (complications): Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is most common complication of shingles. It causes severe pain in the areas where you had the shingles rash. It usually gets better in a few weeks or months. But some people can have pain from PHN for many years, and it can interfere with daily life. Vision loss can happen if shingles affects your eye. It may be temporary or permanent. Hearing or balance problems are possible if you have shingles within or near your ear. You may also have weakness of the muscles on that side of your face. These problems can be temporary or permanent. Very rarely, shingles can also lead to pneumonia , brain inflammation ( encephalitis ), or death. How is shingles diagnosed? Usually your health care provider can diagnose shingles by taking your medical history and looking at your rash. In some cases, your provider may scrap off tissue from the rash or swab some fluid from the blisters and send the sample to a lab for testing. What are the treatments for shingles? There is no cure for shingles. Antiviral medicines may help to make the attack shorter and less severe. They may also help prevent PHN. The medicines are most effective if you can take them within 3 days after the rash appears. So if you think you might have shingles, contact your provider as soon as possible. Pain relievers may also help with the pain. A cool washcloth, calamine lotion, and oatmeal baths may help relieve some of the itching. Can shingles be prevented? There is a vaccine, called Shingrix, to help prevent shingles and its complications. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that healthy adults 50 years and older get the vaccine. Your provider might also recommend the vaccine if you are over 19 and have a weakened immune system. The vaccine is given in two doses. If you have shingles, you can help prevent spreading the virus to others by: Staying away from: People with weakened immune systems People who have not had chickenpox or the chickenpox vaccine, especially if they are pregnant Premature or low birth weight babies Keeping the rash covered Not touching or scratching the rash Washing your hands often Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Sinusitis means your sinuses are inflamed. The cause can be an infection or another problem. Your sinuses are hollow air spaces within the bones surrounding the nose. They produce mucus, which drains into the nose.  If your nose is swollen, this can block the sinuses and cause pain. There are several types of sinusitis, including: Acute, which lasts up to 4 weeks Subacute, which lasts 4 to 12 weeks Chronic, which lasts more than 12 weeks and can continue for months or even years Recurrent, with several attacks within a year Acute sinusitis often starts as a cold, which then turns into a bacterial infection.  Allergies, nasal problems, and certain diseases can also cause acute and chronic sinusitis. Symptoms of sinusitis can include fever, weakness, fatigue, cough, and congestion. There may also be mucus drainage in the back of the throat, called postnasal drip. Your health care professional diagnoses sinusitis based on your symptoms and an examination of your nose and face. You may also need imaging tests. Treatments include antibiotics, decongestants, and pain relievers. Using heat pads on the inflamed area, saline nasal sprays, and vaporizers can also help.

What are skin infections? Your skin is your body's largest organ. It has many different functions, including covering and protecting your body. It helps keep germs out. But sometimes the germs can cause a skin infection. It often happens when the germs enter your body through a break, cut, or wound on your skin. Other skin infections can happen in places where the skin rubs together, especially if the area is moist. Infections can also happen when you have a poor blood supply to an area of your body or if your immune system is weakened because of another disease or a medical treatment. Some skin infections cover a small area on the top of your skin. Other infections can go deep into your skin or spread to a larger area. What causes skin infections? Skin infections are caused by different kinds of germs. For example,: Bacteria cause cellulitis , impetigo , and staphylococcal (staph) infections Viruses cause shingles , warts , and herpes simplex Fungi cause athlete's foot and yeast infections Parasites cause body lice , head lice , and scabies Who is more likely to get a skin infection? You are more likely to get a skin infection if you: Have poor circulation Have diabetes Are older Have an immune system disease , such as HIV Have a weakened immune system because of chemotherapy or other medicines that suppress your immune system Have to stay in one position for a long time, such as if you are sick and have to stay in bed for a long time or you are paralyzed Are malnourished Have excessive skinfolds, which can happen if you have obesity What are the symptoms of skin infections? The symptoms depend on the type of infection. Some symptoms that are common to many skin infections include rashes , swelling, redness, pain, pus, and itching . How are skin infections diagnosed? To diagnose a skin infection, your health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. You may have lab tests, such as a skin culture. This is a test to identify what type of infection you have, using a sample from your skin. Your provider may take the sample by swabbing or scraping your skin or removing a small piece of skin ( biopsy ). Sometimes providers use other tests, such as blood tests. How are skin infections treated? The treatment depends on the type of infection and how serious it is. Some infections will go away on their own. When you do need treatment, it may include a cream or lotion to put on the skin. Other possible treatments include medicines and a procedure to drain pus.

Smallpox is a disease caused by the Variola major virus. Some experts say that over the centuries it has killed more people than all other infectious diseases combined.  Worldwide vaccination stopped the spread of smallpox three decades ago. The last case was reported in 1977. Two research labs still keep small amounts of the virus.  Experts fear bioterrorists could use the virus to spread disease. Smallpox spreads very easily from person to person. Symptoms are flu-like.  They include: High fever Fatigue Headache Backache A rash with flat red sores There is no treatment. Fluids and medicines for pain or fever can help control symptoms. Most people recover, but some can die. Those who do recover may have severe scars. The U.S. stopped routine smallpox vaccinations in 1972. Military and other high-risk groups continue to get the vaccine. The U.S. has increased its supply of the vaccine in recent years.  The vaccine makes some people sick, so doctors save it for those at highest risk of disease.

What are Staphylococcal (staph) infections? Staphylococcus (staph) is a group of bacteria. There are more than 30 types. A type called Staphylococcus aureus causes most infections. Staph bacteria can cause many different types of infections, including: Skin infections , which are the most common types of staph infections. Bacteremia, an infection of the bloodstream. This can lead to sepsis , a very serious immune response to infection. Bone infections . Endocarditis , an infection of the inner lining of the heart chambers and valves. Food poisoning . Pneumonia . Toxic shock syndrome (TSS), a life-threatening condition caused by toxins from certain types of bacteria. What causes staph infections? Some people carry staph bacteria on their skin or in their noses, but they do not get an infection. But if they get a cut or wound, the bacteria can enter the body and cause an infection. Staph bacteria can spread from person to person. They can also spread on objects, such as towels, clothing, door handles, athletic equipment, and remotes. If you have staph and do not handle food properly when you are preparing it, you can also spread staph to others. Who is more likely to get a staph infection? Anyone can develop a staph infection, but certain people are more likely to get one, including those who: Have a chronic condition such as diabetes , cancer, vascular disease , eczema , and lung disease Have a weakened immune system, such as from HIV , medicines to prevent organ rejection, or chemotherapy Had surgery Are in the hospital Use a catheter, breathing tube, or feeding tube Have an implanted device, such as a pacemaker or artificial joint or heart valve Have burns , especially if they are deep or cover a large area of the body Are on dialysis Inject illegal drugs Do contact sports, since you may have skin-to-skin contact with others or share equipment What are the symptoms of staph infections? The symptoms of a staph infection depend on the type of infection: Skin infections can look like pimples or boils. They may be red, swollen, and painful. Sometimes there is pus or other drainage. They can turn into impetigo , which turns into a crust on the skin, or cellulitis , a swollen, red area of skin that feels hot. Bone infections can cause pain, swelling, warmth, and redness in the infected area. You may also have chills and a fever . Endocarditis causes some flu-like symptoms: fever , chills, and fatigue. It also causes symptoms such as rapid heartbeat, shortness of breath, and fluid buildup in your arms or legs. Food poisoning typically causes nausea and vomiting , diarrhea , and fever. If you lose too many fluids, you may also become dehydrated . Pneumonia symptoms include a high fever, chills, and cough that doesn't get better. You may also have chest pain and shortness of breath . Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) causes high fever, sudden low blood pressure, vomiting, diarrhea, and confusion. You may have a sunburn-like rash somewhere on your body. TSS can lead to organ failure. How are staph infections diagnosed? Your health care provider will do a physical exam and ask about your symptoms. Often, providers can tell if you have a staph skin infection by looking at it. To check for other types of staph infections, providers may do a culture , with a skin scraping, tissue sample, stool sample, or throat or nasal swabs. There may be other tests, such as imaging tests , depending on the type of infection. What are the treatments for staph infections? Treatment for staph infections is antibiotics . Depending on the type of infection, the antibiotics might be a cream, ointment, medicines (to swallow), or intravenous (IV) medicine. If you have an infected wound, your provider might drain it. Sometimes you may need surgery for bone infections. Some staph infections, such as MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), are resistant to many antibiotics . There are still certain antibiotics that can treat these infections. Can staph infections be prevented? Certain steps can help to prevent staph infections: Use good hygiene , including washing your hands often. Don't share towels, sheets, or clothing with someone who has a staph infection. It's best not to share athletic equipment. If you do need to share, make sure that it is properly cleaned and dried before you use it. Practice food safety , including not preparing food for others when you have a staph infection. If you have a cut or wound, keep it covered.

Strep is short for Streptococcus, a type of bacteria. There are several types. Two of them cause most of the strep infections in people: group A and group B. Group A strep causes: Strep throat - a sore, red throat. Your tonsils may be swollen and have white spots on them. Scarlet fever - an illness that follows strep throat. It causes a red rash on the body. Impetigo - a skin infection Toxic shock syndrome Cellulitis and necrotizing fasciitis (flesh-eating disease) Group B strep can cause blood infections, pneumonia and meningitis in newborns. A screening test during pregnancy can tell if you have it. If you do, intravenous (IV) antibiotics during labor can save your baby's life.  Adults can also get group B strep infections, especially if they are 65 or older or already have health problems. Strep B can cause urinary tract infections, blood infections, skin infections and pneumonia in adults. Antibiotics are used to treat strep infections.

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by bacteria. It infects the genital area, lips, mouth, or anus of both men and women. You usually get syphilis from sexual contact with someone who has it. It can also pass from mother to baby during pregnancy. The early stage of syphilis usually causes a single, small, painless sore. Sometimes it causes swelling in nearby lymph nodes. If you do not treat it, syphilis usually causes a non-itchy skin rash, often on your hands and feet. Many people do not notice symptoms for years. Symptoms can go away and come back. The sores caused by syphilis make it easier to get or give someone HIV during sex. If you are pregnant, syphilis can cause complications, or you could lose your baby. In rare cases, syphilis causes serious health problems and even death. Syphilis is easy to cure with antibiotics if you catch it early. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading syphilis. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Tetanus is a serious illness caused by Clostridium bacteria. The bacteria live in soil, saliva, dust, and manure. The bacteria can enter the body through a deep cut, like those you might get from stepping on a nail, or through a burn. The infection causes painful tightening of the muscles, usually all over the body. It can lead to "locking" of the jaw. This makes it impossible to open your mouth or swallow. Tetanus is a medical emergency. You need to get treatment in a hospital. A vaccine can prevent tetanus.  It is given as a part of routine childhood vaccination. Adults should get a tetanus shot, or booster, every 10 years. If you get a bad cut or burn, see your doctor - you may need a booster. Immediate and proper wound care can prevent tetanus infection.

What are ticks? Ticks are small parasites. They may look like insects, but they have eight legs and are related to spiders. Ticks feed on the blood of people and warm-blooded animals. There are many types of ticks in the United States, and they live in different parts of the country. Ticks can be different colors and sizes. They can be light-colored, reddish brown, or dark brown. Some ticks are so small that they can be difficult to see. Ticks may get on you if you walk though areas where they live, such as tall grass, leaf litter or shrubs. Why do I need to be worried about tick bites? If you spend time outdoors or have pets that go outdoors, you need to beware of ticks. When they bite, certain types of ticks can pass on germs that cause different diseases. Sometimes the symptoms can be mild. In other cases, you can have serious, long-lasting health problems. Some of the diseases you can get from a tick bite (called tickborne diseases) include: Lyme disease Alpha-gal syndrome (tick bite red meat allergy) Babesiosis Ehrlichiosis Rocky Mountain spotted fever Tularemia What happens if I get bitten by a tick? You may not feel it when a tick bites you. The tick can stay attached to your body for several days. If that tick is infected, it can pass along any germs to you once it starts sucking your blood. But if you catch it and remove it before it has filled up on your blood, you are less likely to get infected. How do I remove a tick? If you find a tick attached to your skin, remove the tick as soon as you can. You could use a tick removal device or a fine-tipped tweezers: Using the tweezers, grab the tick as close to your skin as possible. Pull upward with steady, even pressure. Don't twist or jerk the tick. You want to remove the whole tick in one piece if you can. If the mouth-parts of the tick break off and stay in the skin, try to remove them. But if you can't remove them easily, then leave them. Thoroughly clean the bite area and your hands with rubbing alcohol or soap and water. When do I need to contact my health care provider about a tick bite? Many tickborne diseases can have similar signs and symptoms. The most common are: Fever Chills Aches and pains Rash If you develop any of these symptoms within several weeks of removing a tick, contact your provider. How can I prevent tick bites? There are steps you can take to prevent tick bites: Avoid wooded, brushy, and grassy areas, especially during warmer months. Wear insect repellent with DEET, picaridin or another U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. Wear light-colored protective clothing. Treat your clothing and gear with products containing 0.5% permethrin. Tuck your pant legs into your socks and your shirt into your pants. Remove your clothing after being outdoors. Check your clothing for ticks and remove any ticks that you find. Wash and dry your clothes at high temperatures. Check yourself, your children, and your pets daily for ticks and carefully remove any ticks you find.

Tinea is the name of a group of diseases caused by a fungus.  Types of tinea include ringworm, athlete's foot and jock itch. These infections are usually not serious, but they can be uncomfortable. You can get them by touching an infected person, from damp surfaces such as shower floors, or even from a pet. Symptoms depend on the affected area of the body: Ringworm is a red skin rash that forms a ring around normal-looking skin. A worm doesn't cause it. Scalp ringworm causes itchy, red patches on your head. It can leave bald spots. It usually affects children. Athlete's foot causes itching, burning and cracked skin between your toes. Jock itch causes an itchy, burning rash in your groin area. Over-the-counter creams and powders will get rid of many tinea infections, particularly athlete's foot and jock itch. Other cases require prescription medicine.

Toxoplasmosis is a disease caused by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii. More than 60 million people in the U.S. have the parasite.  Most of them don't get sick. But the parasite causes serious problems for some people. These include people with weak immune systems and babies whose mothers become infected for the first time during pregnancy. Problems can include damage to the brain, eyes, and other organs. You can get toxoplasmosis from : Waste from an infected cat Eating contaminated meat that is raw or not well cooked Using utensils or cutting boards after they've had contact with contaminated raw meat Drinking infected water Receiving an infected organ transplant or blood transfusion Most people with toxoplasmosis don't need treatment. There are drugs to treat it for pregnant women and people with weak immune systems. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Traveling can increase your chances of getting sick. A long flight can increase your risk for deep vein thrombosis. Once you arrive, it takes time to adjust to the water, food, and air in another place. Water in developing countries can contain viruses , bacteria , and parasites that cause stomach upset and diarrhea. Be safe by using only bottled or purified water for drinking, making ice cubes, and brushing your teeth. If you use tap water, boil it or use iodine tablets. Food poisoning can also be a risk. Eat only food that is fully cooked and served hot.  Avoid unwashed or unpeeled raw fruits and vegetables. If you are traveling out of the country, you might also need vaccinations or medicines to prevent specific illnesses. Which ones you need will depend on what part of the world you're visiting, the time of year, your age, overall health status, and previous vaccinations. See your doctor 4 to 6 weeks before your trip. Most vaccines take time to become effective. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a parasite. It spreads from person to person during sex. Many people do not have any symptoms. If you do get symptoms, they usually happen within 5 to 28 days after being infected. It can cause vaginitis in women. Symptoms include: Yellow-green or gray discharge from the vagina Discomfort during sex Vaginal odor Painful urination Itching burning, and soreness of the vagina and vulva Most men do not have symptoms. If they do, they may have: Itching or irritation inside the penis Burning after urination or ejaculation Discharge from the penis Trichomoniasis can increase the risk of getting or spreading other sexually transmitted infections. Pregnant women with trichomoniasis are more likely to give birth too early , and their babies are more likely have a low birth weight . Lab tests can tell if you have the infection. Treatment is with antibiotics . If you are infected, you and your partner must be treated. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading trichomoniasis. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is tuberculosis (TB)? Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial disease that usually attacks the lungs. But it can also attack other parts of the body, including the kidneys, spine, and brain. Not everyone infected with TB bacteria (germs) becomes sick. So, there are two types of TB conditions: Inactive (latent) TB infection , where the TB germs live in your body but don't make you sick. TB disease (active TB) where you get sick from the TB germs. TB disease can almost always be cured with antibiotics . But if it's not treated properly, it can be fatal. TB is found in the U.S., but it is more common in certain other countries. What causes tuberculosis (TB)? TB is caused by bacteria (germs) called Mycobacterium tuberculosis . The germs spread from person to person through the air. People who have TB disease in their throat or lungs spread the germs in the air when they cough, sneeze, talk, or sing. If you breathe in the air that has the germs, you can get TB. TB is not spread by touching, kissing, or sharing food or dishes. You're more likely to catch TB from people you live or work with than from people you see for shorter amounts of time. Who is more likely to get infected with tuberculosis (TB) germs? Anyone who is near a person with TB disease can get infected with the germs. You are more likely to be near someone with TB disease if you: Were born in or often travel to countries where TB disease is common Are a health care worker Work or live in a place where TB is more common, such as shelters for people without homes, jails, and nursing homes Who is more likely to develop TB disease? Certain people are more likely to get sick with TB disease after they get infected. They include people who: Have HIV Became infected with TB in the last 2 years Have other diseases, such as diabetes , that make it hard for your body to fight TB germs Have alcohol use disorder (AUD) or inject illegal drugs Were not treated correctly for TB in the past Are under age 5 Are an older adult Take medicines that weaken the immune system , such as medicines taken after an organ transplant , steroids , and specialized treatments for certain autoimmune diseases What are the symptoms of tuberculosis (TB)? Most people who have TB germs in their bodies don't get sick with TB disease. Instead, they have inactive TB infection. With an inactive TB infection, you: Don't have symptoms Can't spread TB to others Could get sick with active TB disease in the future if your immune system becomes weak for another reason Need to take medicine to prevent getting sick with active TB disease in the future If you have TB disease , the TB germs are active, meaning that they are growing (multiplying) inside your body and making you sick. If the TB is growing in your lungs or throat, you can spread the TB germs to other people. You can get sick with TB disease weeks to years after you're infected with TB germs. With TB disease, your symptoms will depend on where the TB is growing in your body: General symptoms may include: Chills and fever Night sweats (heavy sweating during sleep) Losing weight without trying Loss of appetite Weakness or fatigue Symptoms from TB disease in your lungs may include: A cough that lasts longer than 3 weeks Coughing up blood or sputum (a thick mucus from the lungs) Chest pain How is tuberculosis (TB) diagnosed? Your health care provider or your local health department can test you to find out if you have TB germs in your body. They will give you either a TB skin or blood test . If your test shows that you have TB germs, you'll need to have other tests to see if the germs are actively growing: Tests for TB disease in the lungs usually include testing samples of your sputum and having chest x-rays . Tests for TB disease in other parts of your body may include tests of urine and tissue samples . You may need a TB test if you have symptoms of TB disease or if you are at high risk because you are more likely to be near someone with TB disease. People who have HIV also need to get tested for TB. HIV weakens your immune system. So if you have both HIV and inactive TB, the TB can quickly become active TB disease. You will need treatment for the inactive TB as soon as possible to prevent active TB disease. What is the treatment for tuberculosis (TB)? The treatment for both inactive TB infection and TB disease is antibiotics. To make sure you get rid of all the TB germs in your body, it's very important to follow the directions for taking your medicine. If you don't follow the directions, the TB germs in your body could change and become antibiotic resistant . That means the medicine may stop working and your TB may become hard to cure. For inactive TB infections , you need to take medicines for three, four, six, or nine months, depending on the treatment plan. Treatment helps make sure you don't get TB disease in the future. For active TB disease , you usually need to take medicines for four, six, or nine months, depending on the treatment plan. Treatment will almost always cure you if you take your pills the right way. For TB disease in your lungs or throat , you'll need to stay home for a few weeks, so you don't spread disease to other people. You can protect the people you live with by: Covering your nose and mouth. Opening windows when possible. Not getting too close to them. For drug-resistant TB disease, which means that the TB germs are resistant to certain TB medicines, you will need to take special medicines. Treatment may take a long time, sometimes months or years. The medicines can cause side effects . Your provider will closely monitor your treatment to make sure the medicines are working. By following medical advice for TB testing and treatment, you can keep yourself healthy and help stop the spread of TB. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

The urinary system is the body's drainage system for removing wastes and extra water. It includes two kidneys, two ureters, a bladder, and a urethra. Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are the second most common type of infection in the body. You may have a UTI if you notice: Pain or burning when you urinate Fever, tiredness, or shakiness An urge to urinate often Pressure in your lower belly Urine that smells bad or looks cloudy or reddish Pain in your back or side below the ribs People of any age or sex can get UTIs. But about four times as many women get UTIs as men. You're also at higher risk if you have diabetes, need a tube to drain your bladder, or have a spinal cord injury. If you think you have a UTI it is important to see your doctor. Your doctor can tell if you have a UTI with a urine test .  Treatment is with antibiotics. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What are vaccines? Vaccines are injections (shots), liquids, pills, or nasal sprays that you take to teach your body's immune system to recognize and defend against harmful germs. For example, there are vaccines to protect against diseases caused by: Viruses , like the ones that cause the flu and COVID-19 Bacteria , including tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis What are the types of vaccines? There are several types of vaccines: Live-attenuated vaccines use a weakened form of the germ. Inactivated vaccines use a killed version of the germ. Subunit, recombinant, polysaccharide, and conjugate vaccines use only specific pieces of the germ, such as its protein, sugar, or casing. Toxoid vaccines that use a toxin (harmful product) made by the germ. mRNA vaccines use messenger RNA, which gives your cells instructions for how to make a protein (or piece of a protein) of the germ. Viral vector vaccines use genetic material, which gives your cells instructions for making a protein of the germ. These vaccines also contain a different, harmless virus that helps get the genetic material into your cells. These vaccines may work in different ways, but they all spark an immune response. The immune response is the way your body defends itself against substances it sees as foreign or harmful. These substances include germs that can cause disease. What happens in an immune response? There are different steps in the immune response: When a germ invades, your body sees it as foreign. Your immune system helps your body fight off the germ. Your immune system also remembers the germ. It will attack the germ if it ever invades again. This "memory" protects you against the disease that the germ causes. This type of protection is called immunity. What are immunization and vaccination? Immunization is the process of becoming protected against a disease. But it can also mean the same thing as vaccination, which is getting a vaccine to become protected against a disease. Why are vaccines important? Vaccines are important because they protect you against many diseases. These diseases can be very serious. So getting immunity from a vaccine is safer than getting immunity by being sick with the disease. For a few vaccines, getting vaccinated can actually give you a better immune response than getting the disease would. But vaccines don't just protect you. They also protect the people around you through community immunity. What is community immunity? Community immunity, or herd immunity, is the idea that vaccines can help keep communities healthy. Normally, germs can travel quickly through a community and make a lot of people sick. If enough people get sick, it can lead to an outbreak. But when enough people are vaccinated against a certain disease, it's harder for that disease to spread to others. This type of protection means that the entire community is less likely to get the disease. Community immunity is especially important for people who can't get certain vaccines. For example, they may not be able to get a vaccine because they have weakened immune systems. Others may be allergic to certain vaccine ingredients. And newborn babies are too young to get some vaccines. Community immunity can help to protect them all. Are vaccines safe? Vaccines are safe . They must go through extensive safety testing and evaluation before they are approved in the United States. What is a vaccine schedule? A vaccine, or immunization, schedule lists which vaccines are recommended for different groups of people. It includes who should get the vaccines, how many doses they need, and when they should get them. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes the vaccine schedule. It's important for both children and adults to get their vaccines according to the schedule. Following the schedule allows them to get protection from the diseases at exactly the right time.

What are vaccines? Vaccines play an important role in keeping us healthy. They protect us from serious and sometimes deadly diseases. Vaccines are injections (shots), liquids, pills, or nasal sprays that you take to teach your body's immune system to recognize and defend against harmful germs. The germs could be viruses or bacteria . Some types of vaccines contain germs that cause disease. But the germs have been killed or weakened enough that they won't make you sick. Some vaccines only contain a part of a germ. Other types of vaccines include instructions for your cells to make a protein of the germ. These different vaccine types all spark an immune response, which helps your body fight off the germs. Your immune system will also remember the germ and attack it if that germ ever invades again. This protection against a certain disease is called immunity. These diseases can be very serious. Because of this, getting immunity from a vaccine is safer than getting immunity by being sick with the disease. And for a few vaccines, getting vaccinated can actually give you a better immune response than getting the disease would. Do vaccines cause side effects? As with medicines, any vaccine can cause side effects. Most of the time the side effects are minor, such as a sore arm, fatigue , or mild fever . They usually go away within a few days. These common side effects are often a sign that your body is starting to build immunity against a disease. Serious side effects from vaccines can happen, but they are very rare. These side effects could include a severe allergic reaction . Other possible side effects are different for each vaccine. Talk with your health care provider if you're concerned about your health after getting vaccinated. Some people worry that childhood vaccines could cause autism spectrum disorder (ASD). But many scientific studies have looked at this and have found no link between vaccines and ASD. How are vaccines tested for safety? Every vaccine that is approved in the United States goes through extensive safety testing. It starts with testing and evaluation of the vaccine before it's approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This process can often take several years.: First, the vaccine is tested in labs. Based on those tests, the FDA decides whether to test the vaccine with people. Testing with people is done through clinical trials . In these trials, the vaccines are tested on volunteers. Clinical trials usually start with 20 to 100 volunteers, but eventually include thousands of volunteers. The clinical trials have three phases. The trials are looking for the answer to important questions such as Is the vaccine safe? What dose (amount) works best? How does the immune system react to it? How effective is it? During the process, the FDA works closely with the company who makes the vaccine to evaluate the vaccine's safety and effectiveness. If the vaccine is found to be safe and effective, it will be approved and licensed by the FDA. After a vaccine is licensed, experts may consider adding it to the recommended vaccine, or immunization, schedule. This schedule is from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). It lists which vaccines are recommended for different groups of people. They list which age groups should get which vaccines, how many doses they need, and when they should get them. Testing and monitoring continue after the vaccine is approved: The company making the vaccines tests every batch of vaccines for quality and safety. The FDA reviews the results of these tests. It also inspects the factories where the vaccine is made. These checks help make sure the vaccines meet standards for quality and safety. The FDA, CDC, and other federal agencies continue to monitor its safety, to watch for possible side effects. They have systems to track any safety issues with the vaccines. These high safety standards and testing help to make sure that vaccines in the United States are safe. Vaccines help protect against serious, even deadly, diseases. They not only protect you, but also help to keep these diseases from spreading to others.

Valley Fever is a disease caused by a fungus (or mold) called Coccidioides. The fungi live in the soil of dry areas like the southwestern U.S. You get it from inhaling the spores of the fungus. The infection cannot spread from person to person. Anyone can get Valley Fever. But it's most common among older adults, especially those 60 and older. People who have recently moved to an area where it occurs are at highest risk for infection. Other people at higher risk include: Workers in jobs that expose them to soil dust.   These include construction workers, agricultural workers, and military forces doing field training. African Americans and Asians Women in their third trimester of pregnancy People with weak immune systems Valley Fever is often mild, with no symptoms. If you have symptoms, they may include a flu-like illness, with fever, cough, headache, rash, and muscle aches. Most people get better within several weeks or months. A small number of people may develop a chronic lung or widespread infection. Valley Fever is diagnosed by testing your blood, other body fluids, or tissues. Many people with the acute infection get better without treatment. In some cases, doctors may prescribe antifungal drugs for acute infections. Severe infections require antifungal drugs. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are viruses? Viruses are very tiny germs. They are made of genetic material (either DNA or RNA) inside of a protein coating. There are a huge number of viruses on earth. Only a small number of them can infect humans. Those viruses can infect our cells, which may cause disease. Some of the diseases that viruses can cause include the common cold , the flu , COVID-19 , and HIV . How are viruses spread? Viruses can be spread in different ways: Through droplets and particles that are breathed out by someone who has the infection. You might breathe in the droplets or particles, or they could land on your mouth, nose, or eyes. By touching surfaces or objects that have the virus on them and then touching your mouth, nose, or eyes. From the pregnant parent to the baby during pregnancy . Through contaminated food or water . By being bitten by an infected insect or animal. Through sexual contact (usually vaginal, anal and oral sex) with someone who has the infection. How do viruses cause disease? Viruses are like hijackers. They invade living, normal cells. They then use those cells to multiply (make copies of themselves). This process is also called replication. The process can kill, damage, or change the infected cells. Sometimes this can make you sick. The symptoms can range from mild to very severe. Other times, your immune system may be able to fight it off and you may not have any symptoms. Each different virus usually only infects one type of cell in your body. For example, hepatitis viruses affect the cells in the liver. HIV infects a certain type of immune system cell. What are the treatments for viral infections? For most viral infections, treatments can only help with symptoms while you wait for your immune system to fight off the virus. There are antiviral medicines to treat some viral infections. Antibiotics do not work for viral infections. Can viral infections be prevented? Vaccines can help prevent you from getting many viral diseases. You may be able to prevent some viral infections by: Proper hand washing . Paying attention to food safety . Cleaning surfaces that may be infected with germs. Avoiding contact with wild animals. Preventing insect bites by using insect repellent when you go outdoors. If you travel to an area that has a high risk of diseases from insect bites, also wear long pants, shirts, and socks. Practicing safe sex (using a condom every time you have anal, vaginal, or oral sex). Avoiding close contact with people who are sick.

Warts are growths on your skin caused by an infection with humanpapilloma virus, or HPV .  Types of warts include : Common warts, which often appear on your fingers Plantar warts, which show up on the soles of your feet Genital warts , which are a sexually transmitted infection (STI) Flat warts, which appear in places you shave frequently In children, warts often go away on their own. In adults, they tend to stay. If they hurt or bother you, or if they multiply, you can remove them. Chemical skin treatments usually work. If not, various freezing, surgical and laser treatments can remove warts.

West Nile virus (WNV) is an infectious disease that first appeared in the United States in 1999.  Infected mosquitoes spread the virus that causes it. People who get WNV usually have no symptoms or mild symptoms.  The symptoms include a fever, headache, body aches, skin rash, and swollen lymph glands.  They can last a few days to several weeks, and usually go away on their own. If West Nile virus enters the brain, however, it can be life-threatening.  It may cause inflammation of the brain, called encephalitis , or inflammation of the tissue that surrounds the brain and spinal cord, called meningitis . A physical exam, medical history, and laboratory tests can diagnose it. Older people and those with weakened immune systems are most at risk.  There are no specific vaccines or treatments for human WNV disease.  The best way to avoid WNV is to prevent mosquito bites : Use insect repellent Get rid of mosquito breeding sites by emptying standing water from flower pots, buckets or barrels Stay indoors between dusk and dawn, when mosquitoes are most active Use screens on windows to keep mosquitoes out

What is whooping cough? Whooping cough, or pertussis, is a respiratory infection that can cause coughing fits. In serious cases, the coughing can become violent and rapid. You may cough so hard that you vomit . The name of the disease comes from the whooping noise you might make when you try to breathe in after coughing. Whooping cough is very contagious and can affect anyone. But it can be especially serious in babies who did not yet get the vaccine. About half of babies under age one who get whooping cough need care in the hospital. What causes whooping cough? Whooping cough is caused by a type of bacteria called Bordetella pertussis. It spreads from person to person. People who have pertussis usually spread it through coughing, sneezing, or breathing very close to someone. It can also sometimes be spread by touching an infected surface and then touching your nose or mouth. If you get pertussis, you are contagious for about 2 weeks after you start coughing. Antibiotics may shorten the time that you are contagious. What are the symptoms of whooping cough? The symptoms of pertussis usually start within 5 to 10 days after you are exposed. But sometimes you may not get symptoms until up to 3 weeks later. Whooping cough usually starts with cold-like symptoms. They may last for 1 to 2 weeks and can include: Runny nose Mild fever Mild, occasional cough The early symptoms in babies can be different. They may only cough a little bit, or they may not cough at all. Babies may have apnea, which means that there is a pause in breathing. They may start to turn blue. If this happens, get medical care for your baby right away. As whopping cough gets worse, the symptoms may include: Fits of many, rapid coughs followed by a high-pitched "whoop" sound Vomiting during or after coughing fits Exhaustion after coughing fits The coughing fits get worse and start happening more often, especially at night. You may have them for up to 10 weeks or more. Recovery from this can happen slowly. Your cough gets milder and happens less often. The coughing fits can come back if you have another respiratory infection, even months after you first got whooping cough. How is whooping cough diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose whooping cough : A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam A lab test which involves taking a sample of mucus from the back of the throat through the nose. This may be done with a swab or syringe filled with saline. The sample is tested for the bacteria that causes whooping cough. Blood test Chest x-ray What are the treatments for whooping cough? The treatment for whooping cough is usually antibiotics. Early treatment is very important. It may make your infection less serious and can also help prevent spreading the disease to others. Treatment after you have been sick for 3 weeks or longer may not help. The bacteria are gone from your body by then, even though you usually still have symptoms. This is because the bacteria have already done damage to your body. Whooping cough can sometimes be very serious and require treatment in the hospital. Can whooping cough be prevented? Vaccines are the best way to prevent whooping cough. There are two vaccines in the United States that can help prevent whooping cough: DTaP and Tdap. These vaccines also provide protection against tetanus and diphtheria . Babies and other people at high risk serious disease should be kept away from people who have whooping cough. Sometimes health care providers give antibiotics to family members of people who have had whooping cough or people who have been exposed to it. The antibiotics may prevent them from getting the disease. You may also help prevent the spread of whooping cough (and other respiratory diseases) by: Washing your hands often with soap and water. You can use an alcohol-based hand rub if soap and water are not available. Avoiding touching your face with unwashed hands Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch, including toys Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or upper shirt sleeve, not hands Staying home when sick Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Candida is the scientific name for yeast. It is a fungus that lives almost everywhere, including in your body. Usually, your immune system keeps yeast under control. If you are sick or taking antibiotics, it can multiply and cause an infection. Yeast infections affect different parts of the body in different ways: Thrush is a yeast infection that causes white patches in your mouth Candida esophagitis is thrush that spreads to your esophagus, the tube that takes food from your mouth to your stomach. It can make it hard or painful to swallow. Women can get vaginal yeast infections, causing vaginitis Yeast infections of the skin cause itching and rashes Yeast infections in your bloodstream can be life-threatening Antifungal medicines get rid of yeast infections in most people. If you have a weak immune system, treatment might be more difficult.

Zika is a virus that is spread mostly by mosquitoes. A pregnant mother can pass it to her baby during pregnancy or around the time of birth. It can spread through sexual contact. There have also been reports that the virus has spread through blood transfusions. There have been outbreaks of Zika virus in the United States, Africa, Southeast Asia, the Pacific Islands, parts of the Caribbean, and Central and South America. Most people who get the virus do not get sick. One in five people do get symptoms, which can include a fever, rash, joint pain, and conjunctivitis ( pink eye ). Symptoms are usually mild, and start 2 to 7 days after being bitten by an infected mosquito. A blood test can tell whether you have the infection. There are no vaccines or medicines to treat it. Drinking lots of fluids, resting, and taking acetaminophen might help. Zika can cause microcephaly (a serious birth defect of the brain ) and other problems in babies whose mothers were infected while pregnant. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that pregnant women do not travel to areas where there is a Zika virus outbreak. If you do decide to travel, first talk to your doctor. You should also be careful to prevent mosquito bites : Use insect repellent Wear clothes that cover your arms, legs, and feet Stay in places that have air conditioning or that use window and door screens Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Adhesions are bands of scar-like tissue. Normally, internal tissues and organs have slippery surfaces so they can shift easily as the body moves. Adhesions cause tissues and organs to stick together. They might connect the loops of the intestines to each other, to nearby organs, or to the wall of the abdomen. They can pull sections of the intestines out of place. This may block food from passing through the intestine. Adhesions can occur anywhere in the body. But they often form after surgery on the abdomen. Almost everyone who has surgery on the abdomen gets adhesions. Some adhesions don't cause any problems. But when they partly or completely block the intestines , they cause symptoms such as: Severe abdominal pain or cramping Vomiting Bloating An inability to pass gas Constipation Adhesions can sometimes cause infertility in women by preventing fertilized eggs from reaching the uterus. No tests are available to detect adhesions.  Doctors usually find them during surgery to diagnose other problems. Some adhesions go away by themselves. If they partly block your intestines, a diet low in fiber can allow food to move easily through the affected area. If you have a complete intestinal obstruction, it is life-threatening. You should get immediate medical attention and may need surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Wild animals usually avoid people. They might attack, however, if they feel threatened, are sick, or are protecting their young or territory. Attacks by pets are more common. Animal bites rarely are life-threatening, but if they become infected, you can develop serious medical problems. To prevent animal bites and complications from bites: Never pet, handle, or feed unknown animals Leave snakes alone Watch your children closely around animals Vaccinate your cats, ferrets, and dogs against rabies Spay or neuter your dog to make it less aggressive Get a tetanus booster if you have not had one recently Wear boots and long pants when you are in areas with venomous snakes If an animal bites you, clean the wound with soap and water as soon as possible. Get medical attention if necessary. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Your ankle bone and the ends of your two lower leg bones make up the ankle joint. Your ligaments, which connect bones to one another, stabilize and support it. Your muscles and tendons move it. The most common ankle problems are sprains and fractures (broken bones). A sprain is an injury to the ligaments. It may take a few weeks to many months to heal completely.  A fracture is a break in a bone.  You can also injure other parts of the ankle such as tendons, which join muscles to bone, and cartilage, which cushions your joints. Ankle sprains and fractures are common sports injuries .

Of the 206 bones in your body, three of them are in your arm: the humerus, radius, and ulna. Your arms are also made up of muscles, joints, tendons, and other connective tissue. Injuries to any of these parts of the arm can occur during sports, a fall, or an accident. Types of arm injuries include : Tendinitis and bursitis Sprains Dislocations Fractures (broken bones) Nerve problems Osteoarthritis You may also have problems or injure specific parts of your arm, such as your hand , wrist , elbow , or shoulder .

Your back is made of bones, muscles, and other tissues extending from your neck to your pelvis. Back injuries can result from sports injuries, work around the house or in the garden, or a sudden jolt such as a car accident. The lower back is the most common site of back injuries and back pain . Common back injuries include : Sprains and strains Herniated disks Fractured (broken) vertebrae These injuries can cause pain and limit your movement. Treatments vary but might include medicines, icing, bed rest, physical therapy, or surgery. You might be able to prevent some back injuries by maintaining a healthy weight, lifting objects with your legs, and using lower-back support when you sit.

Bed bugs bite you and feed on your blood. You may have no reaction to the bites, or you may have small marks or itching.  Severe allergic reactions are rare. Bed bugs don't transmit or spread diseases. Adult bed bugs are brown, 1/4 to 3/8 inch long, and have a flat, oval-shaped body. Young bed bugs (called nymphs) are smaller and lighter in color. Bed bugs hide in a variety of places around the bed.  They might also hide in the seams of chairs and couches, between cushions, and in the folds of curtains.  They come out to feed about every five to ten days.  But they can survive over a year without feeding. To prevent bed bugs in your home: Check secondhand furniture for any signs of bed bugs before bringing it home Use a protective cover that encases mattresses and box springs. Check it regularly for holes. Reduce clutter in your home so they have fewer places to hide Unpack directly into your washing machine after a trip and check your luggage carefully. When staying in hotels, put your suitcases on luggage racks instead of the floor. Check the mattress and headboard for signs of bed bugs. To get rid of bed bugs: Wash and dry bedding and clothing at high temperatures Use mattress, box spring, and pillow encasements to trap bed bugs and help detect infestations Use pesticides if needed Environmental Protection Agency

Bleeding is the loss of blood . It can be external, or outside the body, like when you get a cut or wound . It can also be internal, or inside the body, like when you have an injury to an internal organ.  Some bleeding, such as gastrointestinal bleeding , coughing up blood, or vaginal bleeding , can be a symptom of a disease. Normally, when you are injured and start bleeding, a blood clot forms to stop the bleeding quickly. Afterwards, the clot dissolves naturally. To be able to make a clot, your blood needs blood proteins called clotting factors and a type of blood cell called platelets . Some people have a problem with clotting, due to another medical condition or an inherited disease. There are two types of problems: Your blood may not form clots normally, known as a bleeding disorder . This happens when your body does not make enough platelets or clotting factors, or they don't work the way they should. Your blood may make too many clots, or the clots may not dissolve properly Sometimes bleeding can cause other problems. A bruise is bleeding under the skin. Some strokes are caused by bleeding in the brain. Severe bleeding may require first aid or a trip to the emergency room .

The brachial plexus is a network of nerves that sends signals from the spine to the shoulder, arm, and hand. Damage to the brachial plexus can cause symptoms such as: A limp or paralyzed arm Lack of muscle control in the arm, hand, or wrist Lack of feeling or sensation in the arm or hand Brachial plexus injuries can happen because of shoulder trauma, tumors, or inflammation. Sometimes they happen during childbirth when a baby's shoulders become stuck during delivery and the nerves stretch or tear. Some brachial plexus injuries may heal without treatment. Many children who are injured during birth improve or recover by 3 to 4 months of age. Treatment includes physical therapy and, in some cases, surgery. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A bruise is a mark on your skin caused by blood trapped under the surface. It happens when an injury crushes small blood vessels but does not break the skin. Those vessels break open and leak blood under the skin. Bruises are often painful and swollen. You can get skin, muscle and bone bruises. Bone bruises are the most serious. It can take months for a bruise to fade, but most last about two weeks. They start off a reddish color, and then turn bluish-purple and greenish-yellow before returning to normal. To reduce bruising, ice the injured area and elevate it above your heart. See your health care provider if you seem to bruise for no reason, or if the bruise appears to be infected.

A burn is damage to your body's tissues caused by heat, chemicals, electricity , sunlight , or radiation . Scalds from hot liquids and steam, building fires and flammable liquids and gases are the most common causes of burns. Another kind is an inhalation injury , caused by breathing smoke. There are three types of burns: First-degree burns damage only the outer layer of skin Second-degree burns damage the outer layer and the layer underneath Third-degree burns damage or destroy the deepest layer of skin and tissues underneath Burns can cause swelling, blistering, scarring and, in serious cases, shock , and even death. They also can lead to infections because they damage your skin's protective barrier. Treatment for burns depends on the cause of the burn, how deep it is, and how much of the body it covers. Antibiotic creams can prevent or treat infections.  For more serious burns, treatment may be needed to clean the wound, replace the skin, and make sure the patient has enough fluids and nutrition. NIH: National Institute of General Medical Sciences

What is the chest? The chest is the part of your body between your neck and your abdomen (belly). The medical term for your chest is thorax. Your chest holds many important structures for breathing, digestion, blood circulation, and other important body functions. These structures include your: Ribs and breastbone Esophagus, the tube between your mouth and stomach Trachea, your windpipe Bronchi, the tubes that carry air from your windpipe to your lungs Lungs Pleura, a thin layer of tissue that covers the lungs and lines the inside wall of the chest space Heart and large blood vessels Thymus, a gland that's part of your immune system Nerves What are chest injuries and disorders? Chest injuries and disorders are problems that affect any of the organs or structures located in your chest. There are many types of chest injuries and disorders, for example: Broken ribs Esophagus disorders Swallowing disorders , also called dysphagia Tracheal disorders Bronchial disorders Lung diseases and collapsed lung Pleural disorders Heart diseases Mediastinal diseases, which are tumors, inflammation, and other problems with the structures in the mediastinum, which is the space between your lungs, breastbone, and spine Thoracic aortic aneurysm Thoracic outlet syndrome Chest injuries may happen from the force of car accidents, falls , or sports injuries . Or the chest may be pierced by a bullet or sharp object. Because your chest holds so many important structures, certain chest injuries may be life-threatening. How are chest injuries and disorders diagnosed? Diagnosis of chest injuries or disorders depends on the type of symptoms you're having and whether you've had a chest injury. Injuries are usually obvious, but in most cases, you'll need tests to know how serious an injury is. There are many types of tests for diagnosing different types of chest injuries and disorders, for example: Diagnostic imaging tests Heart tests Lung function tests Bronchoscopy Pleural fluid analysis Dysphagia tests Biopsy Treatments will depend on the type of chest injury or disorder you have.

Child abuse is doing something or failing to do something that results in harm to a 
child or puts a child at risk of harm. Child abuse can be physical, sexual or emotional. Neglect, or not providing for a child's needs, is also a 
form of abuse. Most abused children suffer greater emotional than physical damage. An abused child may 
become depressed. He or she may withdraw, think of suicide or become violent. An older 
child may use drugs or alcohol, try to run away or abuse others. Child abuse is a serious problem. If you suspect a child is being abused or neglected, 
call the police or your local child welfare agency.

Food or small objects can cause choking if they get caught in your throat and block your airway. This keeps oxygen from getting to your lungs and brain. If your brain goes without oxygen for more than four minutes, you could have brain damage or die. Young children are at an especially high risk of choking. They can choke on foods like hot dogs, nuts and grapes, and on small objects like toy pieces and coins. Keep hazards out of their reach and supervise them when they eat. When someone is choking, quick action can be lifesaving. Learn how to do back blows, the Heimlich maneuver (abdominal thrusts), and CPR .

A concussion is a type of brain injury .  It involves a short loss of normal brain function. It happens when a hit to the head or body causes your head and brain to move rapidly back and forth. This sudden movement can cause the brain to bounce around or twist in the skull, creating chemical changes in your brain. Sometimes it can also stretch and damage your brain cells. Sometimes people call a concussion a "mild" brain injury. It is important to understand that while concussions may not be life-threatening, they can still be serious. Concussions are a common type of sports injury . Other causes of concussions include blows to the head, bumping your head when you fall, being violently shaken, and car accidents. Symptoms of a concussion may not start right away; they may start days or weeks after the injury. Symptoms may include a headache or neck pain. You may also have nausea, ringing in your ears, dizziness, or tiredness. You may feel dazed or not your normal self for several days or weeks after the injury. Consult your health care professional if any of your symptoms get worse, or if you have more serious symptoms such as: Convulsions or seizures Drowsiness or inability to wake up A headache that gets worse and does not go away Weakness, numbness, or decreased coordination Repeated vomiting or nausea Confusion Slurred speech Loss of consciousness To diagnose a concussion, your health care provider will do a physical exam and will ask about your injury. You will most likely have a neurological exam, which checks your vision, balance, coordination, and reflexes. Your health care provider may also evaluate your memory and thinking. In some cases, you may also have a scan of the brain, such as a CT scan or an MRI . A scan can check for bleeding or inflammation in the brain, as well as a skull fracture (break in the skull). Most people recover fully after a concussion, but it can take some time. Rest is very important after a concussion because it helps the brain to heal. In the very beginning, you may need to limit physical activities or activities that involve a lot of concentration, such as studying, working on the computer, or playing video games. Doing these may cause concussion symptoms (such as headache or tiredness) to come back or get worse. Then when your health care provider says that it is ok, you can start to return to your normal activities slowly. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

When someone's blood flow or breathing stops, seconds count. Permanent brain damage or death can happen quickly. If you know how to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), you could save a life. CPR is an emergency procedure for a person whose heart has stopped (called sudden cardiac arrest ) or who is no longer breathing. CPR can maintain the blood flow breathing until emergency medical help arrives. Take these steps if someone is in sudden cardiac arrest: Call 911. If someone else is around, have them look for an automated external defibrillator (AED). An AED is a device that sends an electric shock to the heart to try to restore its normal rhythm. AEDs are available in many public places such as schools, businesses, and airports . Make sure that the person with sudden cardiac arrest is lying on their back on a firm surface. If you haven't had any CPR training, you can do "hands-only" CPR for a teen or adult whose heart has stopped beating ("hands-only" CPR isn't recommended for children). "Hands-only" CPR uses chest compressions to keep blood circulating. Chest compressions involve pushing hard and fast in the center of the chest. If you've had training, you can use chest compressions, clear the airway, and do rescue breathing. Rescue breathing helps get oxygen to the lungs for a person who has stopped breathing. To keep your skills up, repeat the CPR training every two years. Use the AED as soon as possible, if there is one available.

What is a dislocated shoulder? Your shoulder joint is made up of three bones: your collarbone, your shoulder blade, and your upper arm bone. The top of your upper arm bone is shaped like a ball. This ball fits into a cuplike socket in your shoulder blade. A shoulder dislocation is an injury that happens when the ball pops out of your socket. A dislocation may be partial, where the ball is only partially out of the socket. It can also be a full dislocation, where the ball is completely out of the socket. What causes a dislocated shoulder? Your shoulders are the most movable joints in your body. They are also the most commonly dislocated joints. The most common causes of shoulder dislocations are: Sports injuries Accidents, including traffic accidents Falling on your shoulder or outstretched arm Seizures and electric shocks, which can cause muscle contractions that pull the arm out of place Who is at risk for a dislocated shoulder? A dislocated shoulder can happen to anyone, but they are more common in young men, who are more often involved in sports and other physical activities. Older adults, especially women, are also at higher risk because they are more likely to fall. What are the symptoms of a dislocated shoulder? The symptoms of a dislocated shoulder include: Severe shoulder pain Swelling and bruising of your shoulder or upper arm Numbness and/or weakness in your arm, neck, hand, or fingers Trouble moving your arm Your arm seems to be out of place Muscle spasms in your shoulder If you are having these symptoms, get medical treatment right away. How is a dislocated shoulder diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will take a medical history and examine your shoulder. Your provider may also ask you to get an x-ray to confirm the diagnosis. What are the treatments for a dislocated shoulder? The treatment for dislocated shoulder usually involves three steps: The first step is a closed reduction, a procedure in which your health care provider puts the ball of your upper arm back into the socket. You may first get medicine to relieve the pain and relax your shoulder muscles. Once the joint is back in place, the severe pain should end. The second step is wearing a sling or other device to keep your shoulder in place. You will wear it for a few days to several weeks. The third step is rehabilitation, once the pain and swelling have improved. You will do exercises to improve your range of motion and strengthen your muscles. You may need surgery if you injure the tissues or nerves around the shoulder or if you get repeated dislocations. A dislocation can make your shoulder unstable. When that happens, it takes less force to dislocate it. This means that there is a higher risk of it happening again. Your health care provider may ask you to continue doing some exercises to prevent another dislocation.

Dislocations are joint injuries that force the ends of your bones out of position. The cause is often a fall or a blow, sometimes from playing a contact sport . You can dislocate your ankles, knees, shoulders , hips, elbows and jaw. You can also dislocate your finger and toe joints. Dislocated joints often are swollen, very painful and visibly out of place. You may not be able to move it. A dislocated joint is an emergency.  If you have one, seek medical attention. Treatment depends on which joint you dislocate and the severity of the injury. It might include manipulations to reposition your bones, medicine, a splint or sling, and rehabilitation. When properly repositioned, a joint will usually function and move normally again in a few weeks. Once you dislocate a shoulder or kneecap, you are more likely to dislocate it again. Wearing protective gear during sports may help prevent dislocations.

People drown when they get too much water in their lungs. You can drown in as little as an inch or two of water. Babies can drown in a sink or bathtub. Preschoolers are most likely to drown in a swimming pool. People who have seizure disorders are also at risk in the water. Drowning can happen quickly and silently. Drowning precautions should include: Fences around pools Supervising children near any body of water, including tubs Not swimming or boating when under the influence of alcohol or sedatives Wearing life jackets when boating Learning CPR

Your elbow joint is made up of bone, cartilage, ligaments and fluid. Muscles and tendons help the elbow joint move. When any of these structures is hurt or diseased, you have elbow problems. Many things can make your elbow hurt. A common cause is tendinitis , an inflammation or injury to the tendons that attach muscle to bone. Tendinitis of the elbow is a sports injury , often from playing tennis or golf. You may also get tendinitis from overuse of the elbow. Other causes of elbow pain include sprains and strains , fractures (broken bones), dislocations , bursitis , and arthritis . Treatment depends on the cause.

Many older people are victims of elder abuse. It is the mistreatment of an older person, usually by a caregiver. It can happen within the family.  It can also happen in assisted living facilities or nursing homes. The mistreatment may be: Physical, sexual, or emotional abuse Neglect or abandonment Financial abuse - stealing of money or belongings Possible signs of elder abuse include unexplained bruises, burns, and injuries. There may also be bed sores and poor hygiene. The person may become withdrawn, agitated, and depressed. There may be a sudden change in the person's financial situation. Elder abuse will not stop on its own. Someone else needs to step in and help. If you think that an older person is in urgent danger, call 911. Otherwise, contact adult protective services. NIH: National Institute on Aging

When you come in direct contact with electricity, it can pass through your body and cause injuries. These electrical injuries can be external or internal. You may have one or both types. External injuries are skin burns . Internal injuries include damage to your organs, bones, muscles, and nerves. You could also have abnormal heart rhythms and sudden cardiac arrest (SCA). How bad your injuries are depends on how strong the electric current was, what type of current it was, how it moved through your body, and how long you were exposed. Other factors include how healthy you are, and how quickly you get treatment. Causes of electrical injuries include: Lightning strikes Faulty electrical appliances Work-related exposures Contact with household wiring or power lines Accidents in small children, when they bite or suck on electrical cords, or stick objects in outlets If you get an electrical injury, you should see a doctor. You may have internal damage and not realize it.

The structure of your face helps protect your eyes from injury. Still, injuries can damage your eye, sometimes severely enough that you could lose your vision. Most eye injuries are preventable. If you play sports or work in certain jobs, you may need protection. The most common type of injury happens when something irritates the outer surface of your eye. Certain jobs such as industrial jobs or hobbies such as carpentry make this type of injury more likely. It's also more likely if you wear contact lenses. Chemicals or heat can burn your eyes. With chemicals, the pain may cause you to close your eyes.  This traps the irritant next to the eye and may cause more damage. You should wash out your eye right away while you wait for medical help.

Face injuries and disorders can cause pain and affect how you look. In severe cases, they can affect sight, speech, breathing and your ability to swallow. Fractures (broken bones), especially in the bones of your nose, cheekbone and jaw , are common facial injuries. Certain diseases also lead to facial disorders. For example, nerve diseases like trigeminal neuralgia or Bell's palsy sometimes cause facial pain, spasms and trouble with eye or facial movement. Birth defects can also affect the face. They can cause underdeveloped or unusually prominent facial features or a lack of facial expression. Cleft lip and palate are a common facial birth defect.

You use your fingers and thumbs to do everything from grasping objects to playing musical instruments to typing. When there is something wrong with them, it can make life difficult. Common problems include: Injuries that result in fractures (broken bones), ruptured ligaments and dislocations Osteoarthritis - wear-and-tear arthritis. It can also cause deformity. Tendinitis - irritation of the tendons Dupuytren's contracture - a hereditary thickening of the tough tissue that lies just below the skin of your palm. It causes the fingers to stiffen and bend. Trigger finger - an irritation of the sheath that surrounds the flexor tendons. It can cause the tendon to catch and release like a trigger.

Accidents happen. Someone chokes on an ice cube or gets stung by a bee. It is important to know when to call 911 -- it is for life-threatening emergencies.  While waiting for help to arrive, you may be able to save someone's life. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) is for people whose hearts or breathing has stopped and the Heimlich maneuver is for people who are choking. You can also learn to handle common injuries and wounds . Cuts and scrapes, for example, should be rinsed with cool water. To stop bleeding, apply firm but gentle pressure, using gauze. If blood soaks through, add more gauze, keeping the first layer in place. Continue to apply pressure. It is important to have a first aid kit available.  Keep one at home and one in your car. It should include a first-aid guide.  Read the guide to learn how to use the items, so you are ready in case an emergency happens.

Each of your feet has 26 bones, 33 joints, and more than 100 tendons, muscles, and ligaments. No wonder a lot of things can go wrong. Here are a few common problems: Bunions - hard, painful bumps on the big toe joint Corns and calluses - thickened skin from friction or pressure Plantar warts - warts on the soles of your feet Fallen arches - also called flat feet Ill-fitting shoes often cause these problems. Aging and being overweight also increase your chances of having foot problems.

If you've ever gotten a splinter or had sand in your eye, you've had experience with a foreign body. A foreign body is something that is stuck inside you but isn't supposed to be there. You may inhale or swallow a foreign body, or you may get one from an injury to almost any part of your body.  Foreign bodies are more common in small children, who sometimes stick things in their mouths, ears, and noses. Some foreign bodies, like a small splinter, do not cause serious harm. Inhaled or swallowed foreign bodies may cause choking or bowel obstruction and may require medical care.

What is a fracture? A fracture is a break in a bone. Fractures are usually caused by injuries. Since they can sometimes be serious, it's important to get medical care right away if you think you have a fracture. What are the different types of fractures? There are different ways to describe fractures. For example, there are different types of fractures based on: Whether the bone is partially or completely broken. Whether the bone breaks through the skin; if it does, it's called an open (or compound) fracture. If not, it's a closed fracture. The direction or shape of the break, for example if it's in a line across the bone or if it has some kind of pattern. The cause of the break. For example, a stress fracture is a small break in a bone that is often caused by overuse. Which bone is broken, for example facial fractures include nose and jaw fractures. What causes fractures? Fractures commonly happen because of car accidents, falls , or sports injuries . Overuse and repetitive motions can also cause fractures. Low bone density and osteoporosis are conditions which cause weakening of your bones. Having one of these conditions makes you much more likely to break a bone. What are the symptoms of a fracture? The symptoms of a fracture can vary, depending on which bone you broke. But they may include: Intense pain Deformity, for example a limb that looks out of place Swelling, bruising, or tenderness around the injury Trouble moving the injured part If you think that you may have broken a bone, get medical care right away. How are fractures diagnosed? To find out if you have a fracture, your health provider will do a physical exam and ask about your injury. They will also likely order an x-ray or other imaging test to see if your bone is broken. What are the treatments for fractures? The most common treatment for a fracture is for you to wear a cast or a splint. This will keep your bone from moving while it heals. How long you need to wear it will depend on the type of fracture and which bone is affected. But it's often for several weeks. Your provider will let you when you can get it off. In some cases, you may need surgery to put in plates, pins, or screws to keep the bone in place. Can fractures be prevented? There are steps you can take to lower your risk of fractures: Keeping your bones strong by: Getting enough calcium and vitamin D in your diet Getting regular physical activity , including weight bearing exercises such as walking, tennis, and dancing Getting treatment for low bone density or osteoporosis (if needed) Wearing protective equipment when you do sports Preventing falls by: Getting rid of any tripping hazards in your home Being careful when walking on wet or icy surfaces Choosing the right footwear

Frostbite is an injury to the body that is caused by freezing. It most often affects the nose, ears, cheeks, chin, fingers, or toes. Frostbite can permanently damage the body, and severe cases can lead to amputation . If you have frostbite, the skin in that area may turn white or grayish-yellow. It may feel firm or waxy when you touch it. The area will also feel numb. If you have symptoms of frostbite, seek medical care. But if immediate medical care isn't available, here are steps to take: Get into a warm room as soon as possible. If possible, do not walk on frostbitten feet or toes. Walking increases the damage. Put the affected area in warm - not hot - water. You can also warm the affected area using body heat. For example, use your armpit to warm frostbitten fingers. Don't rub the frostbitten area with snow or massage it at all. This can cause more damage. Don't use a heating pad, heat lamp, or the heat of a stove, fireplace, or radiator for warming. Since frostbite makes an area numb, you could burn it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

No matter how old you are or what you do for a living, you are always using your hands. 
When there is something wrong with them, you may not be able to do your regular activities. Hand problems include  : Carpal tunnel syndrome - compression of a nerve as it 
goes through the wrist, often making your fingers feel numb Injuries that result in fractures (broken bones), ruptured ligaments 
and dislocations Osteoarthritis - wear-and-tear arthritis, which can 
also cause deformity Tendinitis - irritation of the tendons Disorders and injuries of your fingers and thumb

Chances are you've bumped your head before.  Often, the injury is minor because your skull is hard and it protects your brain.  But other head injuries can be more severe, such as a skull fracture, concussion , or traumatic brain injury . Head injuries can be open or closed.  A closed injury does not break through the skull.  With an open, or penetrating, injury, an object pierces the skull and enters the brain.  Closed injuries are not always less severe than open injuries. Some common causes of head injuries are falls , motor vehicle accidents , violence, and sports injuries . It is important to know the warning signs of a moderate or severe head injury.  Get help immediately if the injured person has: A headache that gets worse or does not go away Repeated vomiting or nausea Convulsions or seizures An inability to wake up Dilated (enlarged) pupil in one or both eyes Slurred speech Weakness or numbness in the arms or legs Loss of coordination Increased confusion, restlessness, or agitation Doctors use a neurologic exam and imaging tests to make a diagnosis. Treatment depends on the type of injury and how severe it is. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Your body normally cools itself by sweating.  During hot weather, especially when it is very humid, sweating just isn't enough to cool you off. Your body temperature can rise to dangerous levels and you can develop a heat illness. Most heat illnesses happen when you stay out in the heat too long. Exercising and working outside in high heat can also lead to heat illness. Older adults, young children, and those who are sick or overweight are most at risk. Taking certain medicines or drinking alcohol can also raise your risk. Heat-related illnesses include: Heat stroke - a life-threatening illness in which body temperature may rise above 106 F (41 C) in minutes. Symptoms include dry skin, a rapid, strong pulse, dizziness, nausea, and confusion. If you see any of these signs, get medical help right away. Heat exhaustion -  an illness that can happen after several days of exposure to high temperatures and not enough fluids. Symptoms include heavy sweating, rapid breathing, and a fast, weak pulse. If it is not treated, it can turn into heat stroke. Heat cramps - muscle pains or spasms that happen during heavy exercise. You usually get them in your abdomen, arms, or legs. Heat rash - skin irritation from excessive sweating. It is more common in young children. You can lower your risk of heat illness by drinking fluids to prevent dehydration , replacing lost salt and minerals, and limiting your time in the heat. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Heel problems are common and can be painful. Often, they result from too much stress on your heel bone and the tissues that surround it. That stress can come from: Injuries Bruises that you get walking, running or jumping Wearing shoes that don't fit or aren't made well Being overweight These can lead to tendinitis, bursitis, and fasciitis, which are all types of inflammation of the tissues that surround your heel. Over time the stress can cause bone spurs and deformities. Certain diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and gout, can also lead to heel problems. Treatments for heel problems might include rest, medicines, exercises, taping, and special shoes. Surgery is rarely needed.

Your hip is the joint where your femur (thigh bone) meets your pelvis (hip bone). There are two main parts: a ball at the end of the femur, which fits in a socket in the pelvis. Your hip is known as a ball-and-socket joint. This is because you have a ball at the end of your femur, and it fits into a socket in your pelvis. This makes your hips very stable and allows for a wide range of motion. When they are healthy, it takes great force to hurt them. However, playing sports, running, overuse, or falling can sometimes lead to hip injuries such as: Strains Bursitis Dislocations Fractures (broken bones) Certain diseases also lead to hip injuries or problems. Osteoarthritis can cause pain 
and limited motion. Osteoporosis of the hip causes weak bones that break easily. Both of 
these are common in older people. Another problem is hip dysplasia, where the ball at the end of the femur is loose in the hip socket. It can cause hip dislocation. Babies who have hip dysplasia are usually born with it, but sometimes they develop it later. Treatment for hip disorders may include rest, medicines, physical therapy, or surgery, including hip replacement .

Cold weather can affect your body in different ways. You can get frostbite , which is an injury to the body that is caused by freezing. Your body can also lose heat faster than you can produce it. That can cause hypothermia, or abnormally low body temperature. It can make you sleepy, confused, and clumsy. Because it happens gradually and affects your thinking, you may not realize you need help. That makes it especially dangerous. A body temperature below 95 F (35 C) is a medical emergency and can lead to death if not treated promptly. Anyone who spends much time outdoors in cold weather can get hypothermia. You can also get it from being cold and wet, or under cold water for too long. Babies and old people are especially at risk. Babies can get it from sleeping in a cold room. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Inhalation injuries are acute injuries to your respiratory system and lungs. They can happen if you breathe in toxic substances, such as smoke (from fires), chemicals, particle pollution, and gases. Inhalation injuries can also be caused by extreme heat; these are a type of thermal injuries. Over half of deaths from fires are due to inhalation injuries. Symptoms of inhalation injuries can depend on what you breathed in. But they often include: Coughing and phlegm A scratchy throat Irritated sinuses Shortness of breath Chest pain or tightness Headaches Stinging eyes A runny nose If you have a chronic heart or lung problem, an inhalation injury can make it worse. To make a diagnosis, your health care provider may use a scope to look at your airways and check for damage. Other possible tests include imaging tests of the lungs, blood tests, and lung function tests. If you have an inhalation injury, your health care provider will make sure that your airway is not blocked. Treatment is with oxygen therapy , and in some cases, medicines. Some patients need to use a ventilator to breathe. Most people get better, but some people have permanent lung or breathing problems. Smokers and people who had a severe injury are at a greater risk of having permanent problems. You can take steps to try to prevent inhalation injuries: At home, practice fire safety , which includes preventing fires and having a plan in case there is a fire If there is smoke from a wildfire nearby or lots of particulate pollution in the air, try to limit your time outdoors. Keep your indoor air as clean as possible, by keeping windows closed and using an air filter. If you have asthma, another lung disease, or heart disease, follow your health care provider's advice about your medicines and respiratory management plan. If you are working with chemicals or gases, handle them safely and use protective equipment

Most insect bites are harmless, though they sometimes cause discomfort. Bee, wasp, and hornet stings and fire ant bites usually hurt. Mosquito and flea bites usually itch. Insects can also spread diseases. In the United States, some mosquitoes spread West Nile virus . Travelers outside the United States may be at risk for malaria and other infections. To prevent insect bites and their complications: Don't bother insects Use insect repellant Wear protective clothing Be careful when you eat outside because food attracts insects If you know you have severe allergic reactions to insect bites and stings (such as anaphylaxis ), carry an emergency epinephrine kit

What is intimate partner violence (IPV)? Intimate partner violence (IPV) is abuse that happens in a romantic relationship. The intimate partner could be a current or former spouse or dating partner. IPV is also known as domestic violence. IPV may include different types of abuse, such as: Physical violence , when a person hurts or tries to hurt a partner by hitting, kicking, or using another type of physical force. Sexual violence which involves forcing or attempting to force a partner to take part in sexual activity when the partner does not or cannot consent. The sexual activity could include things like sex acts, sexual touching, or non-physical sexual events (e.g., sexting). Emotional abuse , which includes threats, name-calling, put-downs, and humiliation. It can also involve controlling behavior, such as telling a partner how to act or dress and not letting them see family or friends. Economic abuse , also called financial abuse, which involves controlling access to money. Stalking , which is repeated, unwanted contact that causes fear or concern for the safety of the partner. This can include watching or following the partner. The stalker may send repeated, unwanted phone calls or texts. Who is affected by intimate partner violence (IPV)? It is hard to know exactly how common IPV is because it is often not reported. But we do know that anyone can be affected by it. IPV can happen to anyone. It affects people with all levels of income and education. What are the signs that someone is experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? If you think that a loved one might be experiencing IPV, watch for these signs: Does your friend or loved one: Have unexplained cuts or bruises? Avoid friends, family, and favorite activities? Make excuses for their partner's behavior? Look uncomfortable or fearful around their partner? Does your friend or loved one's partner: Yell at or make fun of them? Try to control them by making all the decisions? Check up on them at work or school? Force them to do sexual things they don't want to do? Threaten to hurt themself if the partner wants to break up? What can I do if I am experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? Your safety is the most important concern. If you are in immediate danger, call 911. If you are not in immediate danger, you can: Get medical care if you have been injured or sexually assaulted. Call a helpline for free, anonymous help. You can contact the National Domestic Violence Hotline at 800-799-SAFE (7233) or 800-787-3224 (TTY). You can also chat with them through their website or through text by texting START to 88788. Find out where to get help in your community. Contact local organizations that can help you. Make a safety plan to leave. Intimate partner violence usually does not get better. Think about a safe place for you to go and all of the things that you will need when you leave. Save the evidence. Keep evidence of abuse, such as pictures of your injuries or threatening emails or texts. Make sure that it is in a safe place the abuser cannot access. Talk to someone you trust , such as a family member, a friend, a co-worker, or a spiritual leader. Consider getting a restraining order to protect yourself. How can I help someone who is experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? Let your loved one know that being treated this way isn't healthy and that they are not to blame. You should: Call 911 if there is immediate danger. Watch for the signs of abuse. Learn about the signs and keep track of the ones that you see. Find out about local resources. Get the addresses and phone numbers of some local resources in your community. Then you'll be able to share the information if the person is ready for it. Set up a time to talk. Make sure you can have your conversation in a safe, private place. Your loved one's partner may have access to his or her cell phone or computer, so be careful about sharing information over text or email. Be specific about why you are worried. Describe the behaviors that concern you. Be as specific as possible when explaining why you are worried. Plan for safety. If your loved one is ready to leave an abusive partner, help make a plan for getting out of the relationship as safely as possible. An intimate partner violence counselor can help with making a safety plan. Be patient and do not judge. You should talk about your concerns with your loved one, but you need to understand that they may not be ready to talk about it. Let them know that you're available to talk at any time, and that you will listen without judging them.

Your jaw is a set of bones that holds your teeth. It includes: The maxilla, which is the upper part of your jaw. It holds your top teeth in place and doesn't move. It also supports the muscles involved in chewing and facial expressions. The mandible, which is the lower part of your jaw. You move it when you talk or chew. It also holds your lower teeth in place. The temporomandibular joints (TMJs), which are two joints (one on each side) that connect your mandible to your skull. Jaw problems can include: Fractures (broken bones). Dislocations , which are joint injuries that force the ends of your bones out of position. Temporomandibular disorders (TMDs), which are conditions that affect your TMJs. Osteonecrosis , which happens when the blood flow to part of your bone is disrupted. It can cause the bone to break down. Jaw tumors, which can be benign (not cancer) or cancer. Jaw defects, which are birth defects in which your jaw could be missing or deformed. Diagnostic imaging tests are often used to diagnose jaw injuries and disorders. Your treatment will depend on which jaw problem you have.

Your knee joint is made up of bone, cartilage, ligaments and fluid. Muscles and tendons help the knee joint move. When any of these structures is hurt or diseased, you have knee problems. Knee problems can cause pain and difficulty walking. Knee problems are very common, and they occur in people of all ages. Knee problems can interfere with many things, from participation in sports to simply getting up from a chair and walking. This can have a big impact on your life. The most common disease affecting the knee is osteoarthritis . The cartilage in the knee gradually wears away, causing pain and swelling. Injuries to ligaments and tendons also cause knee problems. A common injury is to the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). You usually injure your ACL by a sudden twisting motion. ACL and other knee injuries are common sports injuries . Treatment of knee problems depends on the cause. In some cases your doctor may recommend knee replacement . NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Your legs are made up of bones, blood vessels, muscles, and other connective tissue. They are important for motion and standing. Playing sports, running, falling, or having an accident can damage your legs. Common leg injuries include sprains and strains , joint dislocations , and fractures (broken bones). These injuries can affect the entire leg, or just the foot , ankle , knee , or hip . Certain diseases also lead to leg problems. For example, knee osteoarthritis, common in older people, can cause pain and limited motion. Problems in your veins in your legs can lead to varicose veins or deep vein thrombosis .

Mosquitoes are insects that live all over the world. There are thousands of different species of mosquitoes; about 200 of those live in the United States. Female mosquitoes bite animals and humans and drink a very small amount of their blood. They need protein and iron from blood to produce eggs. After drinking blood, they find some standing water and lay their eggs in it. The eggs hatch into larvae, then pupae, and then they become adult mosquitos. The males live for about a week to ten days, and the females can live up to several weeks. Some female mosquitoes can hibernate in the winter, and they can live for months. What health problems can mosquito bites cause? Most mosquito bites are harmless, but there are times when they can be dangerous. The ways that mosquito bites can affect humans include: Causing itchy bumps , as an immune system response to the mosquito's saliva. This is the most common reaction. The bumps usually go away after a day or two. Causing allergic reactions , including blisters, large hives, and in rare cases, anaphylaxis . Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that affects the whole body. It is a medical emergency. Spreading diseases to humans . Some of these diseases can be serious. Many of them do not have any treatments, and only a few have vaccines to prevent them. These diseases are more of a problem in Africa and other tropical areas of the world, but more of them are spreading to the United States. One factor is climate change , which makes the conditions in some parts of the United States more favorable to certain types of mosquitoes. Other reasons include increased trade with, and travel to, tropical and subtropical areas. Which diseases can mosquitoes spread? Common diseases spread by mosquitoes include: Chikungunya , a viral infection that causes symptoms such as fever and severe joint pain. The symptoms usually last about a week, but for some, the joint pain may last for months. Most cases of chikungunya in the United States are in people who traveled to other countries. There have been a few cases where it has spread in the United States. Dengue , a viral infection that causes a high fever, headaches, joint and muscle pain, vomiting, and a rash. Most people get better within a few weeks. In some cases, it can become very severe, even life-threatening. Dengue is rare in the United States. Malaria , a parasitic disease that causes serious symptoms such as high fevers, shaking chills, and flu-like illness. It can be life-threatening, but there are drugs to treat it. Malaria is a major health problem in many tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Almost all cases of malaria in the United States are in people who traveled to other countries. West Nile Virus (WNV), a viral infection that often has no symptoms. In those that do have symptoms, they are usually mild, and include fever, headache, and nausea. In rare cases, the virus can enter the brain, and it can be life-threatening. WNV has spread across the continental United States. Zika Virus , a viral infection that often does not cause symptoms. One in five infected people do get symptoms, which are usually mild. They include a fever, rash, joint pain, and pink eye. Besides being spread by mosquitoes, Zika can spread from mother to baby during pregnancy and cause serious birth defects. It can also spread from one partner to another during sex. There have been a few outbreaks of Zika in the southern United States. Can mosquito bites be prevented? Use an insect repellent when you go outdoors. Choose an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. They are evaluated to make sure they are safe and effective. Make sure that the repellant has one of these ingredients: DEET, picaridin, IR3535, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or para-menthane-diol. It is important to follow the instructions on the label. Cover up. Wear long sleeves, long pants, and socks when outdoors. Mosquitoes may bite through thin fabric, so spray thin clothes with an EPA-registered repellent like permethrin. Don't apply permethrin directly to skin. Mosquito-proof your home. Install or repair screens on windows and doors to keep mosquitoes out. Use air conditioning if you have it. Get rid of mosquito breeding sites. Regularly empty standing water from your house and yard. The water could be in flowerpots, gutters, buckets, pool covers, pet water dishes, discarded tires, or birdbaths. If you plan to travel, get information about the areas you will be going to. Find out whether there is a risk of diseases from mosquitoes, and if so, whether there is a vaccine or medicine to prevent those diseases. See a health care provider familiar with travel medicine, ideally 4 to 6 weeks before your trip.

Any part of your neck - muscles, bones, joints, tendons, ligaments, or nerves - can cause neck problems. Neck pain is very common. Pain may also come from your shoulder, jaw, head, or upper arms. Muscle strain or tension often causes neck pain. The problem is usually overuse, such as from sitting at a computer for too long.  Sometimes you can strain your neck muscles from sleeping in an awkward position or overdoing it during exercise. Falls or accidents, including car accidents, are another common cause of neck pain.  Whiplash, a soft tissue injury to the neck, is also called neck sprain or strain. Treatment depends on the cause, but may include applying ice, taking pain relievers, getting physical therapy or wearing a cervical collar. You rarely need surgery.

What is radiation? Radiation is energy. It travels in the form of energy waves or high-speed particles. Radiation can occur naturally or be man-made. There are two types: Non-ionizing radiation, which includes radio waves, cell phones, microwaves, infrared radiation and visible light Ionizing radiation, which includes ultraviolet radiation, radon , x-rays , and gamma rays What are the sources of radiation exposure? Background radiation is all around us all the time. Most of it forms naturally from minerals. These radioactive minerals are in the ground, soil, water, and even our bodies. Background radiation can also come from outer space and the sun. Other sources are man-made, such as x-rays, radiation therapy to treat cancer, and electrical power lines. What are the health effects of radiation exposure? Radiation has been around us throughout our evolution. So our bodies are designed to deal with the low levels we're exposed to every day. But too much radiation can damage tissues by changing cell structure and damaging DNA. This can cause serious health problems, including cancer. The amount of damage that exposure to radiation can cause depends on several factors, including: The type of radiation The dose (amount) of radiation How you were exposed, such as through skin contact, swallowing or breathing it in, or having rays pass through your body Where the radiation concentrates in the body and how long it stays there How sensitive your body is to radiation. A fetus is most vulnerable to the effects of radiation. Infants, children, older adults, pregnant women, and people with compromised immune systems are more vulnerable to health effects than healthy adults. Being exposed to a lot of radiation over a short period of time, such as from a radiation emergency , can cause skin burns . It may also lead to acute radiation syndrome (ARS, or "radiation sickness").  The symptoms of ARS include headache and diarrhea. They usually start within hours. Those symptoms will go away and the person will seem healthy for a little while. But then they will get sick again. How soon they get sick again, which symptoms they have, and how sick they get depends on the amount of radiation they received. In some cases, ARS causes death in the following days or weeks. Exposure to low levels of radiation in the environment does not cause immediate health effects. But it can slightly increase your overall risk of cancer. What are the treatments for acute radiation sickness? Before they start treatment, health care professionals need to figure out how much radiation your body absorbed. They will ask about your symptoms, do blood tests, and may use a device that measures radiation. They also try get more information about the exposure, such as what type of radiation it was, how far away you were from the source of the radiation, and how long you were exposed. Treatment focuses on reducing and treating infections, preventing dehydration , and treating injuries and burns. Some people may need treatments that help the bone marrow recover its function. If you were exposed to certain types of radiation, your provider may give you a treatment that limits or removes the contamination that is inside your body. You may also get treatments for your symptoms. How can radiation exposure be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent or reduce radiation exposure: If your health care provider recommends a test that uses radiation, ask about its risks and benefits. In some cases, you may be able to have a different test that does not use radiation. But if you do need a test that uses radiation, do some research into the local imaging facilities. Find one that monitors and uses techniques to reduce the doses they are giving patients. Reduce electromagnetic radiation exposure from your cell phone. At this time, scientific evidence has not found a link between cell phone use and health problems in humans. More research is needed to be sure. But if you still have concerns, you can reduce how much time you spend on your phone. You can also use speaker mode or a headset to place more distance between your head and the cell phone. If you live in a house, test the radon levels, and if you need to, get a radon reduction system. During a radiation emergency, get inside a building to take shelter. Stay inside, with all of the windows and doors shut. Stay tuned to and follow the advice of emergency responders and officials. Environmental Protection Agency

What is a rotator cuff? Your rotator cuff is part of your shoulder joint . It's a group of muscles and tendons that holds the top part of your upper arm bone firmly in your shoulder socket. The rotator cuff keeps your shoulder stable when you move your arm in any direction. What are rotator cuff injuries? Rotator cuff injuries are common. Most of them are wear-and-tear injuries from doing the same arm movements over and over - especially reaching over your head. With time, the tissues in the rotator cuff break down, leading to these injuries: Tendinitis . The tendons in the rotator cuff connect your muscles to your shoulder bones. In tendinitis, the tendons become irritated and swollen from being pinched during shoulder movements. Bursitis . The bursa is a small, fluid-filled sac that pads the space between the rotator cuff and the bones of your shoulder. Bursitis happens when the muscle and bone rub the bursa too much. It swells with extra fluid, which causes pain Rotator cuff tears. Tears in a rotator cuff tendon can happen over time or suddenly from an injury, such as falling on an outstretched arm or lifting something heavy. A tear may go part way through a tendon (partial tear) or all the way through (full tear). Who is more likely to develop a rotator cuff injury? Anyone can develop a rotator cuff injury. But certain people are more likely to have one: People over age 40. Most rotator cuff injuries are from the wear and tear of aging. By age 80, most adults have tears. Athletes. Playing sports with repeated shoulder movements increases the risk of a rotator cuff injury, for example, tennis, swimming, and baseball - especially pitching. People in jobs that require a lot of reaching overhead or heavy lifting. Carpenters, construction workers, and painters are examples of workers who may be more likely to have rotator cuff problems. What are the symptoms of rotator cuff injuries? Rotator cuff injuries don't always cause pain.  But when they do, the pain is often in the top part of your arm or shoulder. You may feel more pain when you: Lie down, especially on the injured shoulder Lift your arm or lower it to the front or side Reach behind your back Other symptoms from a torn rotator cuff may include: Loss of strength in the arm Clicking or popping sounds when you move your arm How are rotator cuff injuries diagnosed? To find out if you have a rotator cuff injury, your health care provider: Will examine your shoulder. This includes checking the range of motion and where the pain is. Will test your arm and shoulder strength. May order imaging tests , such as x-rays , an ultrasound , or an MRI scan . What are the treatments for rotator cuff injuries? The best treatment for you depends on your age, how much your injury bothers you, and whether your injury was sudden or happened from wear and tear. Treatments for rotator cuff injuries often include: Rest Putting ice or a cold pack on the sore area Pain relievers to lessen pain and swelling, such as ibuprofen or aspirin Physical therapy exercises to strengthen your shoulder and improve movement A corticosteroid shot into your shoulder joint if other treatments don't help with the pain Treatments for rotator cuff tendinitis and bursitis may also include ultrasound therapy. Surgery may be an option if your shoulder doesn't feel better in 6 to 12 months. Treatments for a torn rotator cuff may also include heat to the sore area or electrical stimulation of the nerves and muscles (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, TENS). You provider may suggest surgery if your tear is large or is from a recent injury, or symptoms last for 6 to 12 months. When should I see a health care provider for shoulder pain? If certain activities bother your shoulder, it's best to stop doing them and check with your provider. That's because early treatment can prevent mild rotator cuff injuries from becoming more serious later on. If you your arm feels weak right after a sudden injury to your shoulder, see your provider as soon as possible.

What is sexual assault? Sexual assault is any kind of sexual activity, contact, or experience that happens without your consent. That means the sexual activity happens even though you don't agree to it. Sexual assault may happen with: Physical force or threats of force Sexual coercion (being pressured, tricked, threatened, or forced in a nonphysical way) Alcohol or drugs, including date rape drugs Sexual assault may also be called sexual violence or sexual abuse. It affects millions of people each year. Anyone can be a victim of sexual assault. Many victims first experience sexual assault during childhood . Most victims are girls and women. But many boys and men are also victims of sexual assault. If you've been sexually assaulted, it's never your fault. It's something that happens to you. What does sexual assault include? Sexual assault is any unwanted sexual activity, including: Sexual activity with physical contact , which is everything from sexual touching or kissing to rape or attempted rape Sexual activity without physical contact , which includes things that may happen in person, online, or through texts, such as: "Flashing" or exhibitionism (when someone shows you their genitals without asking you for permission) Being forced to look at sexual images or pose for sexual photos Being sent unwanted texts with sexual photos or messages Voyeurism (when someone watches private sexual acts without permission) Getting sexual threats or being sexually harassed (unwelcome sexual comments, requests for sexual favors, or other sexual behavior that's ongoing) Any sexual activity that happens without your consent is sexual assault. What does "consent" mean? Giving your consent means that you clearly and freely say "yes" to sexual activity. Your consent means that you: Know and understand what's going on. Can say what you want to do and don't want to do. Are not underage. Are not being pressured or tricked to do things you don't want to do. Giving consent is not : Silence. Not saying "no" doesn't mean you're saying "yes." Having consented in the past. Having said "yes" to sex with someone in the past doesn't mean that you've agreed to all sexual activity in the future. That's true when you're dating or in a lasting relationship. Being passive and not fighting off an attacker. You cannot give consent if you are: Drugged, drunk, passed out, or asleep. Mentally unable to consent due to illness or disability. Underage (States have different laws about how old you must be to give legal consent to sexual activity.). Sexually coerced. This means that someone is pressuring you to participate in sexual activity. Agreeing to sex under pressure is not giving consent. The pressure may include: Abusing power over you, for example, a boss threatening your job. Making threats to harm people you care about. Making false promises to reward you for sex. Threatening to end a relationship or spread rumors about you. Wearing you down by constantly asking for sex or making you feel guilty or obligated. Who commits sexual assault? Both men and women commit sexual assault. A person who commits sexual assault may be a stranger, but more often it's someone you know, for example: A friend or acquaintance Someone you work with A neighbor A family member A current or past romantic partner, including a spouse What are the possible health effects from sexual assault? Sexual assault may have many health effects. Many of them can affect your lifelong health and well-being. The effects may include: Physical effects such as: Bruises or genital injuries Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Pregnancy Ongoing problems with: Female reproductive health Digestive disorders Your heart Sexual health Psychological effects such as: Depression or anxiety Thoughts about suicide Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Sexual assault victims are more likely to smoke , have  an alcohol use disorder (AUD) , use illegal drugs , and have risky sexual behavior. Girls who experience sexual violence are more likely to become victims of intimate partner violence in adulthood. What can I do if I'm a victim of sexual assault? If you are in danger or need medical care, call 911. If you can, get away from the person who assaulted you and get to a safe place as fast as you can. You can call the National Sexual Assault Hotline at 800-656-HOPE (4673) to connect with a sexual assault service provider in your area who can direct you to local resources. Getting support after a sexual assault may help you cope better and reduce the long-term effects. Victim services like rape crisis centers may provide a safe, healing place where you can find support. Studies show that treatments such as Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TF-CBT) can help victims cope with depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Can sexual assault be prevented? Sexual assault is never the victim's fault. No one who has been assaulted should be blamed for something that they did or did not do. You can take some steps to try to be safer around others: Go to parties with friends. Look out for each other. If a friend seems drunk or drugged, get them to a safe place. Have a plan for how you'll get home, too. Keep control of your drink. Someone could add alcohol or put a drug in it without you knowing. Meet people for the first time in a public place. Listen to your "gut feelings." If you feel uncomfortable around someone, leave. Pay attention to your surroundings. When walking alone, stay in busy well-lit areas. And don't wear headphones; you want to be able to hear what's happening around you. Centers for Disease and Control and Prevention

Your shoulder joint is composed of three bones: the clavicle (collarbone), the scapula (shoulder blade), and the humerus (upper arm bone). Your shoulders are the most movable joints in your body. They can also be unstable because the ball of the upper arm is larger than the shoulder socket that holds it. To remain in a stable or normal position, the shoulder must be anchored by muscles, tendons, and ligaments. Because your shoulder can be unstable, it can be easily injured. Common problems include: Sprains and strains Dislocations Separations Tendinitis Bursitis Torn rotator cuffs Frozen shoulder Fractures (broken bones) Arthritis Health care providers diagnose shoulder problems by using your medical history, a physical exam, and imaging tests. Often, the first treatment for shoulder problems is RICE. This stands for Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation. Other treatments include exercise and medicines to reduce pain and swelling. If those don't work, you may need surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Though many people are afraid of spiders, they rarely bite people unless threatened.  Most spider bites are harmless.  Occasionally, spider bites can cause allergic reactions. And bites by the venomous black widow and brown recluse spiders can be very dangerous to people. If you are bitten by a spider, you may see a reaction similar to that of a bee sting, including redness, pain and swelling at the site. To treat a spider bite: Wash the area well with soap and water Apply an ice pack or a wet compress to the area Take over-the-counter pain medicine, if needed Consider using antihistamines for severe swelling Seek medical treatment for small children and adults with severe symptoms

Your spinal cord is a bundle of nerves that runs down the middle of your back. It carries signals back and forth between your body and your brain. A spinal cord injury disrupts the signals. Spinal cord injuries usually begin with a blow that fractures (breaks) or dislocates your vertebrae, the bone disks that make up your spine. Most injuries don't cut through your spinal cord. Instead, they cause damage when pieces of vertebrae tear into cord tissue or press down on the nerve parts that carry signals. Spinal cord injuries can be complete or incomplete. With a complete spinal cord injury, the cord can't send signals below the level of the injury. As a result, you are paralyzed below the injury. With an incomplete injury, you have some movement and sensation below the injury. A spinal cord injury is a medical emergency. Immediate treatment can reduce long-term effects. Treatments may include medicines, braces or traction to stabilize the spine, and surgery. Later treatment usually includes medicines and rehabilitation therapy. Mobility aids and assistive devices may help you to get around and do some daily tasks. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Exercising is good for you, but sometimes you can injure yourself when you play sports or exercise. Accidents, poor training practices, or improper gear can cause them. Some people get hurt because they are not in shape. Not warming up or stretching enough can also lead to injuries. The most common sports injuries are: Sprains and strains Knee injuries Swollen muscles Achilles tendon injuries Pain along the shin bone Rotator cuff injuries Fractures (broken bones) Dislocations If you get hurt, stop playing. Continuing to play or exercise can cause more harm.  Treatment often begins with the RICE (Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation) method to relieve pain, reduce swelling, and speed healing. Other possible treatments include pain relievers, keeping the injured area from moving, rehabilitation, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

A sprain is a stretched or torn ligament. Ligaments are tissues that connect bones at a joint. Falling, twisting, or getting hit can all cause a sprain. Ankle and wrist sprains are common. Symptoms include pain, swelling, bruising, and being unable to move your joint. You might feel a pop or tear when the injury happens. A strain is a stretched or torn muscle or tendon. Tendons are tissues that connect muscle to bone. Twisting or pulling these tissues can cause a strain. Strains can happen suddenly or develop over time. Back and hamstring muscle strains are common. Many people get strains playing sports. Symptoms include pain, muscle spasms, swelling, and trouble moving the muscle. At first, treatment of both sprains and strains usually involves resting the injured area, icing it, wearing a bandage or device that compresses the area, and medicines. Later treatment might include exercise and physical therapy. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What are ticks? Ticks are small parasites. They may look like insects, but they have eight legs and are related to spiders. Ticks feed on the blood of people and warm-blooded animals. There are many types of ticks in the United States, and they live in different parts of the country. Ticks can be different colors and sizes. They can be light-colored, reddish brown, or dark brown. Some ticks are so small that they can be difficult to see. Ticks may get on you if you walk though areas where they live, such as tall grass, leaf litter or shrubs. Why do I need to be worried about tick bites? If you spend time outdoors or have pets that go outdoors, you need to beware of ticks. When they bite, certain types of ticks can pass on germs that cause different diseases. Sometimes the symptoms can be mild. In other cases, you can have serious, long-lasting health problems. Some of the diseases you can get from a tick bite (called tickborne diseases) include: Lyme disease Alpha-gal syndrome (tick bite red meat allergy) Babesiosis Ehrlichiosis Rocky Mountain spotted fever Tularemia What happens if I get bitten by a tick? You may not feel it when a tick bites you. The tick can stay attached to your body for several days. If that tick is infected, it can pass along any germs to you once it starts sucking your blood. But if you catch it and remove it before it has filled up on your blood, you are less likely to get infected. How do I remove a tick? If you find a tick attached to your skin, remove the tick as soon as you can. You could use a tick removal device or a fine-tipped tweezers: Using the tweezers, grab the tick as close to your skin as possible. Pull upward with steady, even pressure. Don't twist or jerk the tick. You want to remove the whole tick in one piece if you can. If the mouth-parts of the tick break off and stay in the skin, try to remove them. But if you can't remove them easily, then leave them. Thoroughly clean the bite area and your hands with rubbing alcohol or soap and water. When do I need to contact my health care provider about a tick bite? Many tickborne diseases can have similar signs and symptoms. The most common are: Fever Chills Aches and pains Rash If you develop any of these symptoms within several weeks of removing a tick, contact your provider. How can I prevent tick bites? There are steps you can take to prevent tick bites: Avoid wooded, brushy, and grassy areas, especially during warmer months. Wear insect repellent with DEET, picaridin or another U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered insect repellent. Wear light-colored protective clothing. Treat your clothing and gear with products containing 0.5% permethrin. Tuck your pant legs into your socks and your shirt into your pants. Remove your clothing after being outdoors. Check your clothing for ticks and remove any ticks that you find. Wash and dry your clothes at high temperatures. Check yourself, your children, and your pets daily for ticks and carefully remove any ticks you find.

Fourteen of the 26 bones in your feet are in your toes. The toes, particularly your big toe, help you move and keep your balance.  Playing sports, running, stubbing your toe, and dropping something on your foot can damage your toes. Wearing shoes that are too loose or too tight can also cause toe problems. Certain diseases, such as severe arthritis, can cause toe problems and pain. Gout often causes pain in the big toe. Common toe problems include : Corns and bunions Ingrown toenails Sprains and dislocations Fractures (broken bones) Treatments for toe injuries and disorders vary. They might include shoe inserts or special shoes, padding, taping, medicines, rest, and in severe cases, surgery.

What is traumatic brain injury (TBI)? Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a sudden injury that causes damage to the brain. It may happen when there is a blow, bump, or jolt to the head. This is a closed head injury. A TBI can also happen when an object penetrates the skull. This is a penetrating injury. Symptoms of a TBI can be mild, moderate, or severe. Concussions are a type of mild TBI. The effects of a concussion can sometimes be serious, but most people completely recover in time. More severe TBI can lead to serious physical and psychological symptoms, coma , and even death. What causes traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The main causes of TBI depend on the type of head injury : Some of the common causes of a closed head injury include Falls . This is the most common cause in adults age 65 and older. Motor vehicle crashes. This is the most common cause in young adults. Sports injuries Being struck by an object Child abuse . This is the most common cause in children under age 4. Blast injuries due to explosions Some of the common causes of a penetrating injury include Being hit by a bullet or shrapnel Being hit by a weapon such as a hammer, knife, or baseball bat A head injury that causes a bone fragment to penetrate the skull Some accidents such as explosions, natural disasters, or other extreme events can cause both closed and penetrating TBI in the same person. Who is at risk for traumatic brain injury (TBI)? Certain groups are at higher risk of TBI: Men are more likely to get a TBI than women. They are also more likely to have serious TBI. Adults aged 65 and older are at the greatest risk for being hospitalized and dying from a TBI What are the symptoms of traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The symptoms of TBI depend on the type of injury and how serious the brain damage is. The symptoms of mild TBI can include: A brief loss of consciousness in some cases. However, many people with mild TBI remain conscious after the injury. Headache Confusion Lightheadedness Dizziness Blurred vision or tired eyes Ringing in the ears Bad taste in the mouth Fatigue or lethargy A change in sleep patterns Behavioral or mood changes Trouble with memory, concentration, attention, or thinking If you have a moderate or severe TBI, you may have those same symptoms. You may also have other symptoms such as: A headache that gets worse or does not go away Repeated vomiting or nausea Convulsions or seizures Not being able to wake up from sleep Larger than normal pupil (dark center) of one or both eyes. This is called dilation of the pupil. Slurred speech Weakness or numbness in the arms and legs Loss of coordination Increased confusion, restlessness, or agitation How is traumatic brain injury (TBI) diagnosed? If you have a head injury or other trauma that may have caused a TBI, you need to get medical care as soon as possible. To make a diagnosis, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and the details of your injury Will do a neurologic exam May do imaging tests , such as a CT scan or MRI May use a tool such as the Glasgow coma scale to determine how severe the TBI is. This scale measures your ability to open your eyes, speak, and move. May do neuropsychological tests to check how your brain is functioning What are the treatments for traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The treatments for TBI depend on many factors, including the size, severity, and location of the brain injury. For mild TBI , the main treatment is rest. If you have a headache, you can try taking over-the-counter pain relievers . It is important to follow your health care provider's instructions for complete rest and a gradual return to your normal activities. If you start doing too much too soon, it may take longer to recover. Contact your provider if your symptoms are not getting better or if you have new symptoms. For moderate to severe TBI , the first thing health care providers will do is stabilize you to prevent further injury. They will manage your blood pressure, check the pressure inside your skull, and make sure that there is enough blood and oxygen getting to your brain. Once you are stable, the treatments may include: Surgery to reduce additional damage to your brain, for example to Remove hematomas (clotted blood) Get rid of damaged or dead brain tissue Repair skull fractures Relieve pressure in the skull Medicines to treat the symptoms of TBI and to lower some of the risks associated with it, such as Anti-anxiety medication to lessen feelings of nervousness and fear Anticoagulants to prevent blood clots Anticonvulsants to prevent seizures Antidepressants to treat symptoms of depression and mood instability Muscle relaxants to reduce muscle spasms Stimulants to increase alertness and attention Rehabilitation therapies , which can include therapies for physical, emotional, and cognitive difficulties: Physical therapy, to build physical strength, coordination, and flexibility Occupational therapy, to help you learn or relearn how to perform daily tasks, such as getting dressed, cooking, and bathing Speech therapy, to help you to with speech and other communication skills and treat swallowing disorders Psychological counseling, to help you learn coping skills, work on relationships, and improve your emotional well-being Vocational counseling, which focuses on your ability to return to work and deal with workplace challenges Cognitive therapy, to improve your memory, attention, perception, learning, planning, and judgment Some people with TBI may have permanent disabilities . A TBI can also put you at risk for other health problems such as anxiety , depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder . Treating these problems can improve your quality of life. Can traumatic brain injury (TBI) be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent head injuries and TBIs: Always wear your seatbelt and use car seats and booster seats for children Never drive under the influence of drugs or alcohol Wear a properly fitting helmet when riding a bicycle, skateboarding, and playing sports like hockey and football Prevent falls by Making your house safer. For example, you can install railings on the stairs and grab bars in the tub, get rid of tripping hazards, and use window guards and stair safety gates for young children. Improving your balance and strength with regular physical activity

An injury is damage to your body. It is a general term that refers to harm caused by accidents, falls , hits, weapons, and more. In the U.S., millions of people injure themselves every year. These injuries range from minor to life-threatening. Injuries can happen at work or play , indoors or outdoors, driving a car, or walking across the street. Wounds are injuries that break the skin or other body tissues.   They include cuts, scrapes, scratches, and punctured skin. They often happen because of an accident, but surgery, sutures, and stitches also cause wounds. Minor wounds usually aren't serious, but it is important to clean them. Serious and infected wounds may require first aid followed by a visit to your doctor. You should also seek attention if the wound is deep, you cannot close it yourself, you cannot stop the bleeding or get the dirt out, or it does not heal. Other common types of injuries include: Animal bites Bruises Burns Dislocations Electrical injuries Fractures (broken bones) Sprains and strains

Your wrist connects your hand to your forearm. It is not one big joint; it has several small joints. This makes it flexible and allows you to move your hand in different ways. The wrist has two big forearm bones and eight small bones known as carpals. It also has tendons and ligaments, which are connective tissues. Tendons connect muscles to bones. Ligaments connect bones to each other. What are the types of wrist injuries and disorders? Some of the more common types of wrist injuries and disorders are: Carpal tunnel syndrome , which happens when a nerve that runs from your forearm into your palm becomes squeezed at the wrist Ganglion cysts , which are noncancerous lumps or masses Gout , which is a form of arthritis caused by a buildup of uric acid in your joints Fractures (broken bones) Osteoarthritis , the most common type of arthritis. It is caused by wear and tear of the joints. Sprains and strains , which are injuries to ligaments and injuries to muscles or tendons Tendinitis , inflammation of a tendon, usually due to overuse Who is at risk for wrist injuries and disorders? Certain things can put you at higher risk of having a wrist problem, including: Doing sports, which can put you at risk for injuries and puts stress on your wrist. For example, you may fall on your outstretched hand when you are skating or snowboarding. Your wrist could be injured while doing contact sports. And other sports such as gymnastics and basketball can strain your wrists. Doing repetitive wrist motions, such as typing on a keyboard, working on an assembly line, or using power tools. Having certain diseases. For example, rheumatoid arthritis can cause wrist pain. What are the symptoms of wrist injuries and disorders? The symptoms of a wrist problem can vary, depending on the problem. A common symptom is wrist pain. Some other possible symptoms include swelling, a decrease in wrist strength, and sudden numbness or tingling. How are wrist injuries and disorders diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam, including checking your wrist strength and range of motion An x-ray or other imaging test Blood tests What are the treatments for wrist injuries and disorders? Treatments for wrist pain depends on the type of injury or disorder. They may include: Resting your wrist Wearing a wrist brace or cast Pain relievers Cortisone shots Physical therapy Surgery Can wrist injuries and disorders be prevented? To try to prevent wrist problems, you can: Use wrist guards, when doing sports that put you at risk for wrist injuries In the workplace, perform stretching exercises and take frequent rest breaks. You should also pay attention to ergonomics to make sure that you are using the proper wrist position while working. Make sure that you get enough calcium and vitamin D to keep your bones strong

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia among older people. Dementia is a brain disorder that seriously affects a person's ability to carry out daily activities. AD begins slowly. It first involves the parts of the brain that control thought, memory and language. People with AD may have trouble remembering things that happened recently or names of people they know. A related problem, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), causes more memory problems than normal for people of the same age.  Many, but not all, people with MCI will develop AD. In AD, over time, symptoms get worse. People may not recognize family members. They may have trouble speaking, reading or writing. They may forget how to brush their teeth or comb their hair. Later on, they may become anxious or aggressive, or wander away from home. Eventually, they need total care. This can cause great stress for family members who must care for them. AD usually begins after age 60.  The risk goes up as you get older. Your risk is also higher if a family member has had the disease. No treatment can stop the disease. However, some drugs may help keep symptoms from getting worse for a limited time. NIH: National Institute on Aging

What are antidepressants? Antidepressants are prescription medicines to treat depression. Depression is more than feeling a little sad or "blue" for a few days. It's a very common, serious medical illness that affects your mood and general mental health It can make you feel tired, hopeless, worried, or fearful. It can change your thinking, sleeping, and eating. Depression may make some people think about ending their lives. But antidepressants can help many people who have depression. Researchers think antidepressants may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. Are antidepressants used for other conditions? A health care provider may prescribe antidepressants for anxiety , chronic pain , or insomnia . Sometimes providers also prescribe antidepressants for other conditions. What are the different types of antidepressants? There are many types of antidepressants. Each one works differently. Providers usually prescribe newer antidepressants first because they don't cause as many side effects as older types. They also seem to help more kinds of depression and anxiety problems. Most of the newer antidepressants belong to one of these three groups: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) Atypical antidepressants, which are newer antidepressants that don't fit into the other groups If these antidepressants don't help, your provider might suggest one of the older antidepressants. The older types include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Even though these antidepressants may cause more serious side effects, the benefits may outweigh the risks for some people. Which type of antidepressant is right for me? Our bodies and brains all work differently. That means one antidepressant won't work for everyone.  You may need to try two or more medicines before you find one that works for you. Your provider will work with you to choose the best option to try first. You'll consider questions such as: Which symptoms bother you most? Some antidepressants may do a better job helping specific symptoms, such as trouble sleeping. What other medicines and supplements do you take? Some antidepressants can cause problems if you take them with certain medicines and herbs. Did a certain antidepressant work well for a close relative? An antidepressant that helped a parent, brother, or sister could be a good choice for you, too. Do you have other health conditions? Certain antidepressants can make some other conditions better or worse. Any other conditions that you have will be part of choosing your depression treatment. Are you pregnant, planning for pregnancy, or breastfeeding? If so, your provider will help you find a way to treat your depression that's safe for you and your baby. How long do antidepressants take to work? Antidepressants usually take 4 to 8 weeks to work, so you'll need to be patient. You may notice that some problems, such as sleeping and eating, get better before your mood improves. That's a good sign. You may just need to give the medicine a little more time to do its job. Sometimes an antidepressant helps at first, but symptoms return while you're still taking it. But there's usually another one you can try. To get more relief from depression, your provider may suggest combining two antidepressants, using another kind of medicine with an antidepressant, or adding talk therapy or other approaches to improve your mental health . How long will I need to take an antidepressant? When an antidepressant starts to work, you and your provider can decide how long you need to stay on it. The typical length of treatment is 6 to 12 months, but some people may stay on antidepressants for much longer. What are the side effects of antidepressants? Not everyone has side effects from antidepressants. But if you do have them, they're usually mild and may get better over time as your body gets used to the new medicine. The most common side effects from antidepressants include: Nausea and vomiting Weight gain Diarrhea Sleepiness Sexual problems, such as a lack of desire or ability to have sex When thinking about side effects, it's important to remember that there are also risks from not treating depression. Your provider can help you think through the pros and cons of all your options. If you have any side effects from antidepressants, your provider may suggest ways to manage them while you wait to see if the antidepressant will work. If the side effects bother you too much, you may need to change antidepressants. But you should never change your dose or stop taking an antidepressant on your own. If you have serious problems or notice any changes that worry you, such as new or worsening symptoms, unusual changes in your mood, or you start acting differently, call your provider right away. In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may be more likely to think about hurting or killing themselves when starting antidepressants or when the dose is changed. Get medical help right away if this happens. What can I do to take antidepressants safely? Antidepressants are generally safe when you use them correctly: Tell your provider about everything you take. That includes medicines, herbs, supplements, and over-the-counter medicines you take, such as pain relievers and decongestants. Be honest about recreational drugs and alcohol, too. Try to get all your medicines from the same pharmacy. That way the pharmacist can warn you and your provider if you take medicines that may cause problems when used together. Follow all instructions about how to take your medicine. Talk with your provider if side effects bother you. Never stop taking antidepressants without your provider's help. Stopping too fast may make depression come back. You could even make your condition worse. To stop antidepressants safely, you need to give your body time to get used to being without the medicine. Your provider can tell you the safest way to go off an antidepressant. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is anxiety? Anxiety is a feeling of fear, dread, and uneasiness. It might cause you to sweat, feel restless and tense, and have a rapid heartbeat.   It can be a normal reaction to stress. For example, you might feel anxious when faced with a difficult problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. It can help you to cope. The anxiety may give you a boost of energy or help you focus. But for people with anxiety disorders, the fear is not temporary and can be overwhelming. What are anxiety disorders? Anxiety disorders are conditions in which you have anxiety that does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships. What are the types of anxiety disorders? There are several types of anxiety disorders, including: Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). People with GAD worry about ordinary issues such as health, money, work, and family. But their worries are excessive, and they have them almost every day for at least 6 months. Panic disorder . People with panic disorder have panic attacks. These are sudden, repeated periods of intense fear when there is no danger. The attacks come on quickly and can last several minutes or more. Phobias . People with phobias have an intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Their fear may be about spiders, flying, going to crowded places, or being in social situations (known as social anxiety). What causes anxiety disorders? The cause of anxiety is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, stress , and your environment may play a role. Who is at risk for anxiety disorders? The risk factors for the different types of anxiety disorders can vary. For example, GAD and phobias are more common in women, but social anxiety affects men and women equally. There are some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders, including: Certain personality traits, such as being shy or withdrawn when you are in new situations or meeting new people Traumatic events in early childhood or adulthood Family history of anxiety or other mental disorders Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid problems or arrhythmia What are the symptoms of anxiety disorders? The different types of anxiety disorders can have different symptoms. But they all have a combination of: Anxious thoughts or beliefs that are hard to control. They make you feel restless and tense and interfere with your daily life. They do not go away and can get worse over time. Physical symptoms, such as a pounding or rapid heartbeat, unexplained aches and pains, dizziness , and shortness of breath Changes in behavior, such as avoiding everyday activities you used to do Using caffeine , other substances, and certain medicines can make your symptoms worse. How are anxiety disorders diagnosed? To diagnose anxiety disorders, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may also have a physical exam and lab tests to make sure that a different health problem is not the cause of your symptoms. If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation . Your provider may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. What are the treatments for anxiety disorders? The main treatments for anxiety disorders are psychotherapy (talk therapy), medicines, or both: Psychotherapy can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. To be effective, it should focus on your specific anxieties and needs. There are many types; some of the types used for anxiety disorders include: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which teaches you different ways of thinking and behaving. It can help you change how you react to the things that cause you to feel fear and anxiety. It may include exposure therapy. This therapy focuses on having you confront your fears so that you will be able to do the things that you had been avoiding. Acceptance and commitment therapy may help with some anxiety disorders. It uses strategies such as mindfulness and goal setting to reduce discomfort and anxiety. Medicines to treat anxiety disorders include anti-anxiety medicines and certain antidepressants . Some types of medicines may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders. You should work closely with your provider to identify which medicine is best for you. You may need to try more than one medicine before you can find the right one. Support groups and stress management techniques may also be helpful. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder. It is usually first diagnosed in childhood and often lasts into adulthood. But some people don't get diagnosed with ADHD until they are adults. ADHD involves: Having trouble paying attention (inattention) Having trouble controlling impulsive behaviors (impulsivity) Being overly active (hyperactivity) What are the types of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? There are three types of ADHD: Mostly Inattentive ADHD. People with this type of ADHD have trouble paying attention and are easily distracted. It's hard for them to organize or finish tasks. They may have trouble following instructions or conversations. Mostly Hyperactive-Impulsive ADHD. People with this type of ADHD have symptoms of both hyperactivity and impulsivity: With hyperactivity, people feel a need to always be moving. They have trouble sitting still and may fidget and/or talk too much. With impulsivity, people have trouble controlling their actions and words. They tend to act on sudden ideas or feelings without thinking about the possible results. They may interrupt others a lot or have trouble waiting their turn. Combined ADHD. People with this type of ADHD have a mix of inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Combined ADHD is the most common type. It's normal to sometimes have trouble paying attention or sitting still, especially for children. But people with ADHD have more severe symptoms that can sometimes cause serious problems, for example, failing grades for a child or a job loss for an adult. The symptoms are ongoing and may affect family and social life, too. What causes attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? The exact cause of ADHD is unknown. ADHD probably results from a combination of factors, such as genetics and your environment. Researchers are looking at possible environmental factors that might raise the risk of developing ADHD. These factors include brain injuries, nutrition, and social environments. What are the symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? The symptoms of ADHD depend on the type of ADHD a person has: People with symptoms of attention problems may often: Miss details or make careless mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or in other activities Have trouble staying focused on play activities or work tasks Not seem to listen when spoken to directly Find it hard to follow instructions or finish tasks, or may start but get easily sidetracked Have trouble being organized, keeping belongings in order, and managing time Avoid doing tasks that require long periods of mental effort Lose important items, such as books, wallets, keys, eyeglasses, and cellphones Forget about doing daily activities People with symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity may often: Fidget and squirm while seated Get up when staying seated is expected, such as at school or work Run around or climb when it's not appropriate (children) or feel restless (teens and adults) Have trouble doing quiet activities Be constantly moving or "on the go" Talk much more than is normal Blurt out answers before questions are completed Have trouble waiting for their turn Interrupt others for example during conversations or games People with combined ADHD show a mix of inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity symptoms How is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) diagnosed? There is no single test to diagnose ADHD. One step of the process for diagnosing ADHD involves having a physical exam, including vision tests , hearing tests (for children and adults ), and other tests to rule out other problems with symptoms like ADHD. Other problems with similar symptoms include anxiety , depression , sleep problems , and certain types of learning disabilities . The process also involves a thorough medical history and family history.  And it usually includes using standardized ADHD symptom checklists, questionnaires, and/or interview questions. These tools have rating scales (scoring systems) that help the provider see if a person's symptoms and history fit a diagnosis of ADHD. To make a diagnosis of ADHD, the provider needs to have found all of these things: Several symptoms of ADHD that began before age 12. Several symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that have lasted for at least 6 months and cause serious problems: For children up to age 16, there must be at least 6 ongoing symptoms. For people 17 and older, there must be at least 5 ongoing symptoms. Symptoms that happen in 2 or more settings, for example, at home and at work or school. Symptoms that clearly get in the way of functioning well at school, work, and/or in social situations. Symptoms aren't caused by another mental health disorder . What are the treatments for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? Although there is no cure for ADHD, treatments may help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. ADHD is commonly treated with: Medicines. Psychotherapy (talk therapy), including behavior therapy. Education or training for parents to give them the skills and strategies to help their child. This is especially important for younger children. A combination of these treatments. Good treatment plans will include close monitoring, follow-ups, and making changes, if needed, along the way. Having a healthy lifestyle, such as healthy eating and regular exercise , may also help manage symptoms. For school-aged children, school support is important. This could include classroom-based behavioral interventions such as behavior management plans or teaching your child organizational and study skills. It may also include accommodations such as specific seating in the classroom, reduced classwork, or extended time on tests and exams. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder that begins early in childhood and lasts throughout a person's life. It affects how a person acts and interacts with others, communicates, and learns.  It includes what used to be known as Asperger syndrome and pervasive developmental disorders. It is called a "spectrum" disorder because people with ASD can have a range of symptoms. People with ASD might have problems talking with you, or they might not look you in the eye when you talk to them.  They may also have restricted interests and repetitive behaviors.  They may spend a lot of time putting things in order, or they may say the same sentence again and again. They may often seem to be in their "own world." At well-child checkups, the health care provider should check your child's development.  If there are signs of ASD, your child will have a comprehensive evaluation.  It may include a team of specialists, doing various tests and evaluations to make a diagnosis. The causes of ASD are not known.  Research suggests that both genes and environment play important roles. There is currently no one standard treatment for ASD.  There are many ways to increase your child's ability to grow and learn new skills.  Starting them early can lead to better results.  Treatments include behavior and communication therapies, skills training, and medicines to control symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Bereavement is the period of grief and mourning after a death. When you grieve, it's part of the normal process of reacting to a loss. You may experience grief as a mental, physical, social or emotional reaction. Mental reactions can include anger, guilt, anxiety, sadness and despair. Physical reactions can include sleeping problems, changes in appetite, physical problems or illness. How long bereavement lasts can depend on how close you were to the person who died, if the person's death was expected and other factors. Friends, family and faith may be sources of support. Grief counseling or grief therapy is also helpful to some people. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is bipolar disorder? Bipolar disorder is a mood disorder that can cause intense mood swings: Sometimes you may feel extremely "up," elated, irritable, or energized. This is called a manic episode . Other times you may feel "down," sad, indifferent, or hopeless. This is called a depressive episode . You may have both manic and depressive symptoms together. This is called a mixed episode . Along with mood swings, bipolar disorder causes changes in behavior, energy levels, and activity levels. Bipolar disorder used to be called other names, including manic depression and manic-depressive disorder. What are the types of bipolar disorder? There are three main types of bipolar disorder: Bipolar I disorder involves manic episodes that last at least 7 days or manic symptoms so severe that you need immediate hospital care. Depressive episodes are also common. Those often last at least two weeks. This type of bipolar disorder can also involve mixed episodes. Bipolar II disorder involves depressive episodes. But instead of full-blown manic episodes, there are episodes of hypomania. Hypomania is a less severe version of mania. Cyclothymic disorder , or cyclothymia, also involves hypomanic and depressive symptoms. But they are not as intense or as long-lasting as hypomanic or depressive episodes. The symptoms usually last for at least two years in adults and for one year in children and teenagers. With any of these types, having four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year is called "rapid cycling." What causes bipolar disorder? The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. Several factors likely play a role in the disorder. They include genetics , brain structure and function, and your environment. Who is at risk for bipolar disorder? You are at higher risk for bipolar disorder if you have a close relative who has it. Going through trauma or stressful life events may raise this risk even more. What are the symptoms of bipolar disorder? The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. But they involve mood swings known as mood episodes: The symptoms of a manic episode can include Feeling very up, high, or elated Feeling jumpy or wired, more active than usual Having a very short temper or seeming extremely irritable Having racing thoughts and talking very fast Needing less sleep Feeling like you are unusually important, talented, or powerful Do risky things that show poor judgment, such as eating and drinking too much, spending or giving away a lot of money, or having reckless sex The symptoms of a depressive episode can include Feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthless Feeling lonely or isolating yourself from others Talking very slowly, feeling like you have nothing to say, or forgetting a lot Having little energy Sleeping too much Eating too much or too little Lack of interest in your usual activities and being unable to do even simple things Thinking about death or suicide The symptoms of a mixed episode include both manic and depressive symptoms together. For example, you may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized. Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms. For example, you may have hypomania instead of mania. With hypomania, you may feel very good and find that you can get a lot done. You may not feel like anything is wrong. But your family and friends may notice your mood swings and changes in activity levels. They may realize that your behavior is unusual for you. After the hypomania, you might have severe depression. Your mood episodes may last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, symptoms usually occur every day for most of the day. How is bipolar disorder diagnosed? To diagnose bipolar disorder, your health care provider may use many tools: A physical exam A medical history, which will include asking about your symptoms, lifetime history, experiences, and family history Medical tests to rule out other conditions A mental health evaluation. Your provider may do the evaluation or may refer you to a mental health specialist to get one. What are the treatments for bipolar disorder? Treatment can help many people, including those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. The main treatments for bipolar disorder include medicines, psychotherapy, or both: Medicines can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. You may need to try several different medicines to find which one works best for you. Some people need to take more than one medicine. It's important to take your medicine consistently. Don't stop taking it without first talking with your provider.  Contact your provider if you have any concerns about side effects from the medicines. Psychotherapy (talk therapy) can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. It can give you and your family support, education, skills, and coping strategies. There are several different types of psychotherapy that may help with bipolar disorder. Other treatment options include: Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve symptoms. It uses a mild electric current and is done while you are under general anesthesia. ECT is most often used for severe bipolar disorder that is not getting better with other treatments. It may also be used when someone needs a treatment that will work more quickly than medicines. This might be when a person has a high risk of suicide or is catatonic (unresponsive). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves to relieve depression. It is not as powerful as ECT, but with rTMS, you don't need general anesthesia. It also has a low risk of negative effects on your memory and thinking. Light therapy has been shown to be effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Many people with bipolar disorder also find that their depression gets worse during certain seasons, usually in the fall and winter. Light therapy may help with their symptoms. Healthy lifestyle changes, such as getting regular exercise, having a consistent sleep schedule, and keeping a mood journal, can also help with your symptoms. Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. But long-term, ongoing treatment can help manage your symptoms and enable you to live a healthy, successful life. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Learning to live with cancer Cancer is a common disease. Almost 40 percent of Americans will be diagnosed with cancer during their lifetimes. Even though cancer may be life-threatening, many people have successful treatment. Others live with cancer for a very long time. For most people with cancer, learning to live with the disease is one of the biggest challenges they've ever faced. That's because having cancer touches just about every part of your life and the lives of those around you. Cancer and its treatment may change: Your daily routines and ability to work Your important relationships The way you look, feel, and think about yourself You may feel more in control and prepared to cope with these changes if you learn about what to expect. Your health care provider can help you find information and support services that are right for you. Coping with feelings about having cancer Having cancer may cause a range of strong emotions, such as sadness, anger, fear, worry, or guilt. These feelings are normal, and they're likely to change over time. It's helpful to sort out your feelings in a way that's comfortable for you. You might try: Talking openly with someone you trust Writing about your feelings Using relaxation methods, such as meditation and other complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) Doing things you enjoy to give yourself a break from focusing on cancer If your emotions seem to take over your life, tell your provider. You may need extra support if you have symptoms of depression , stress , anxiety , or panic disorder . Communicating with your health care team During cancer treatment, you usually have a team of providers. Along with doctors and nurses, you may be able to talk with social workers, pharmacists, dietitians, and other health professionals. These professionals are prepared to help you deal with the issues that cancer brings up, including concerns about finances . But it's up to you to let your team know what's on your mind. Good communication with your providers may help you feel more in control and satisfied with your care. Your communications may be better if you: Tell your providers how much you want to know about your cancer and its treatment. Do you want all the details or just the big picture? Write down your questions and concerns before your visits. Bring a family member or a friend to your visits. This person can help by listening, taking notes, and asking questions. Talking openly with family and friends Cancer changes the daily routines and roles of the people who love and support you. They may need to start doing the things you've always done for them. And you may need their help doing things you've always done for yourself. These changes can be difficult for everyone. It may help to have an honest talk about changing roles and needs. If that sounds too difficult, ask a social worker or other member of your care team to help you talk with family and friends who are helping with your care. These caregivers may need some support , too. Dealing with changes in your self-image Cancer and its treatment may cause some big changes in how you look, feel, and think about yourself. For example, you may have: Less energy Temporary or permanent changes in your body, such as scars , or hair loss from chemotherapy Problems being sexually close or doubts about dating Coping with these changes can be hard. But most people find ways to feel more positive over time. If you feel well enough, you might try: Exercise . Walking, yoga, or other movement may help you feel stronger and more in control of your body. But check with your provider first. Staying involved in life and helping others. Think about volunteering, hobbies, or other activities that might make you feel good about yourself. Counseling for sexual problems. Talking with a professional, either with a partner or on your own, may help. Adjusting to life after treatment After treatment, you'll have regular cancer follow-up care. Your provider will explain the schedule of checkups and tests you'll need. This is a good time to discuss the challenges you may face ahead. Knowing what to expect may help you make plans as you find a "new normal" with cancer as part of your life. NIH: National Cancer Institute

All kids misbehave some times. And some may have temporary behavior problems due to stress. For example, the birth of a sibling, a divorce, or a death in the family may cause a child to act out. Behavior disorders are more serious. They involve a pattern of hostile, aggressive, or disruptive behaviors for more than 6 months.  The behavior is also not appropriate for the child's age. Warning signs can include: Harming or threatening themselves, other people or pets Damaging or destroying property Lying or stealing Not doing well in school, skipping school Early smoking, drinking or drug use Early sexual activity Frequent tantrums and arguments Consistent hostility toward authority figures If you see signs of a problem, ask for help. Poor choices can become habits. Kids who have behavior problems are at higher risk for school failure, mental health problems , and even suicide . Classes or family therapy may help parents learn to set and enforce limits. Talk therapy and behavior therapy for your child can also help.

It's important to recognize and treat mental illnesses in children early on.  Once mental illness develops, it becomes a regular part of your child's behavior. This makes it more difficult to treat. But it's not always easy to know when your child has a serious problem. Everyday stresses can cause changes in your child's behavior. For example, getting a new brother or sister or going to a new school may cause a child to temporarily act out. Warning signs that it might be a more serious problem include: Problems in more than one setting (at school, at home, with peers) Changes in appetite or sleep Social withdrawal or fear of things he or she did not used to be not afraid of Returning to behaviors more common in younger children, such as bedwetting Signs of being upset, such as sadness or tearfulness Signs of self-destructive behavior, such as head-banging or suddenly getting hurt often Repeated thoughts of death To diagnose mental health problems, the doctor or mental health specialist looks at your child's signs and symptoms, medical history, and family history. Treatments include medicines and talk therapy. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Many people enjoy gambling, whether it's betting on a horse or playing poker on the Internet. Most people who gamble don't have a problem, but some lose control of their gambling. Signs of problem gambling include : Always thinking about gambling Lying about gambling Spending work or family time gambling Feeling bad after you gamble, but not quitting Gambling with money you need for other things If you have concerns about your gambling, ask for help. Your health care provider can work with you to find the treatment that's best for you. NIH: National Institutes of Health

Having a long-term, or chronic, illness can disrupt your life in many ways. You may often be tired and in pain . Your illness might affect your appearance or your physical abilities and independence. You may not be able to work, causing financial problems. For children, chronic illnesses can be frightening, because they may not understand why this is happening to them. These changes can cause stress, anxiety, and anger. If they do, it is important to seek help. A trained counselor can help you develop strategies to regain a feeling of control. Support groups might help, too. You will find that you are not alone, and you may learn some new tips on how to cope. You may be able to manage your illness better if learn more about it. It is important to evaluate the information that you find, to make sure that it is reliable. It is also important to find a health care provider that you can trust.

No matter how well you have prepared , you might feel dazed or numb after going through a disaster. You may also feel sad, helpless, or anxious. In spite of the tragedy, you might just feel happy to be alive. It is not unusual to have bad memories or dreams. You may avoid places or people that remind you of the disaster. You might have trouble sleeping, eating, or paying attention. Many people have short tempers and get angry easily. These are all normal reactions to stress . Sometimes the stress can be too much to handle alone. Some people have long-term problems after a disaster, including: Post-traumatic stress disorder Depression Self-blame Suicidal thoughts Alcohol or drug misuse If your emotional reactions are getting in the way of your relationships, work, or other important activities, talk to a counselor or your health care provider. Treatments are available. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is delirium? Delirium is a mental state in which you are confused, disoriented, and not able to think or remember clearly. It usually starts suddenly. It is often temporary and treatable. There are three types of delirium: Hypoactive, when you are not active and seem sleepy, tired, or depressed Hyperactive, when you are restless or agitated Mixed, when you change back and forth between being hypoactive and hyperactive What causes delirium? There are many different problems that can cause delirium. Some of the more common causes include: Advanced cancer . Alcohol or drugs , either from intoxication or withdrawal. This includes a serious type of alcohol withdrawal syndrome called delirium tremens. It usually happens to people who stop drinking after years of alcohol use disorder (AUD) . Dehydration and electrolyte imbalances . Dementia . Hospitalization , especially in intensive care. Infections , such as urinary tract infections , pneumonia , and the flu . Medicines. This could be a side effect of a medicine, such as sedatives or opioids . Or it could be from withdrawal after stopping a medicine. Metabolic disorders . Organ failure , such as kidney or liver failure. Poisoning . Serious illnesses . Severe pain . Sleep deprivation . Surgeries , including reactions to anesthesia . Who is more likely to get delirium? Certain factors put you at risk for delirium, including: Being in a hospital or nursing home Having dementia Having a serious illness or more than one illness Having an infection Older age Having surgery Taking medicines that affect the mind or behavior Taking high doses of pain medicines , such as opioids What are the symptoms of delirium? The symptoms of delirium usually start suddenly, over a few hours or a few days. They often come and go. The most common symptoms include: Changes in alertness (usually more alert in the morning, less at night) Changing levels of consciousness Confusion Disorganized thinking, talking in a way that doesn't make sense Disrupted sleep patterns, sleepiness Emotional changes: anger, agitation, depression , irritability, overexcitement Hallucinations and delusions Memory problems, especially with short-term memory Trouble concentrating How is delirium diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Physical and neurological exams Mental status testing, which checks for problems with your thinking and alertness Lab and diagnostic imaging tests Delirium and dementia have similar symptoms, so it can be hard to tell them apart. You can also have both at the same time. The differences between them are that: Delirium starts suddenly and can cause hallucinations. It is mainly a problem with attention and staying alert. The symptoms may get better or worse and can last for hours or weeks. Dementia develops slowly and does not cause hallucinations. It usually starts with memory loss. The symptoms don't change often, like they can with delirium. Dementia almost never gets better. What are the treatments for delirium? Treatment of delirium focuses on the causes and symptoms of delirium. The first step is to identify the cause. Often, treating the cause will lead to a full recovery. The recovery may take some time - weeks or sometimes even months. In the meantime, there may be treatments to manage the symptoms, such as: Controlling the environment, which includes making sure that the room is quiet and well-lit, having clocks or calendars in view, and having family members around Medicines, including those that control aggression or agitation and pain relievers if there is pain If needed, making sure that the person has a hearing aid, glasses, or other devices for communication Can delirium be prevented? Treating the conditions that can cause delirium may reduce the risk of getting it. Hospitals can help lower the risk of delirium by avoiding sedatives and making sure that hospital rooms are kept quiet, calm, and well-lit. It can also help to have family members around and to have the same staff members treat the person each day (if possible).

What is dementia? Dementia is a loss of mental functions that is severe enough to affect your daily life and activities. These functions include: Memory Language skills Visual perception (your ability to make sense of what you see) Problem solving Trouble with everyday tasks The ability to focus and pay attention It is normal to become a bit more forgetful as you age. But dementia is not a normal part of aging. It is a serious disorder which interferes with your daily life. What are the types of dementia? The most common types of dementia are known as neurodegenerative disorders. These are diseases in which the cells of the brain stop working or die. They include: Alzheimer's disease , which is the most common form of dementia among older people. People with Alzheimer's have plaques and tangles in their brain. These are abnormal buildups of different proteins. Beta-amyloid protein clumps up and forms plaques in between your brain cells. Tau protein builds up and forms tangles inside the nerve cells of your brain. There is also a loss of connection between nerve cells in the brain. Lewy body dementia , which causes movement symptoms along with dementia. Lewy bodies are abnormal deposits of a protein in the brain. Frontotemporal disorders, which cause changes to certain parts of the brain: Changes in the frontal lobe lead to behavioral symptoms Changes in the temporal lobe lead to language and emotional disorders Vascular dementia, which involves changes to the brain's blood supply. It is often caused by a stroke or atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) in the brain. Mixed dementia, which is a combination of two or more types of dementia. For example, some people have both Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Other conditions can cause dementia or dementia-like symptoms, including: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , a rare brain disorder Huntington's disease , an inherited, progressive brain disease Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), caused by repeated traumatic brain injury HIV-associated dementia (HAD) Who is at risk for dementia? Certain factors can raise your risk for developing dementia, including: Aging. This is the biggest risk factor for dementia. Smoking Uncontrolled diabetes High blood pressure Drinking too much alcohol Having close family members who have dementia What are the symptoms of dementia? The symptoms of dementia can vary, depending on which parts of the brain are affected. Often, forgetfulness is the first symptom.  Dementia also causes problems with the ability to think, problem solve, and reason. For example, people with dementia may: Get lost in a familiar neighborhood Use unusual words to refer to familiar objects Forget the name of a close family member or friend Forget old memories Need help doing tasks that they used to do by themselves Some people with dementia cannot control their emotions and their personalities may change. They may become apathetic, meaning that they are no longer interested in normal daily activities or events. They may lose their inhibitions and stop caring about other peoples' feelings. Certain types of dementia can also cause problems with balance and movement. The stages of dementia range from mild to severe. In the mildest stage, it is just beginning to affect a person's functioning. In the most severe stage, the person is completely dependent on others for care. How is dementia diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam Tests of your thinking, memory, and language abilities Other tests, such as blood tests, genetic tests , and brain scans A mental health evaluation to see whether a mental disorder is contributing to your symptoms What are the treatments for dementia? There is no cure for most types of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementia. Treatments may help to maintain mental function longer, manage behavioral symptoms, and slow down the symptoms of disease. They may include: Medicines may temporarily improve memory and thinking or slow down their decline. They only work in some people. Other medicines can treat symptoms such as anxiety, depression, sleep problems, and muscle stiffness. Some of these medicines can cause strong side effects in people with dementia. It is important to talk to your health care provider about which medicines will be safe for you. Occupational therapy to help find ways to more easily do everyday activities Speech therapy to help with swallowing difficulties and trouble speaking loudly and clearly Mental health counseling to help people with dementia and their families learn how to manage difficult emotions and behaviors. It can also help them plan for the future. Music or art therapy to reduce anxiety and improve well-being Can dementia be prevented? Researchers have not found a proven way to prevent dementia. Living a healthy lifestyle might influence some of your risk factors for dementia.

Depression is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. If you are one of the more than 19 million teens and adults in the United States who have depression, the feelings do not go away. They persist and interfere with your everyday life. Symptoms can include: Feeling sad or "empty" Loss of interest in favorite activities Overeating, or not wanting to eat at all Not being able to sleep, or sleeping too much Feeling very tired Feeling hopeless, irritable, anxious, or guilty Aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems Thoughts of death or suicide Depression is a disorder of the brain. There are a variety of causes, including genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors. Depression can happen at any age, but it often begins in teens and young adults. It is much more common in women. Women can also get postpartum depression after the birth of a baby. Some people get seasonal affective disorder in the winter. Depression is one part of bipolar disorder . There are effective treatments for depression, including antidepressants , talk therapy, or both. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Developmental disabilities are severe, long-term problems. They may be physical, such as blindness .  They may affect mental ability, such as learning disabilities .  Or the problem can be both physical and mental, such as Down syndrome . The problems are usually life-long, and can affect everyday living. There are many causes of developmental disabilities, including: Genetic or chromosome abnormalities. These cause conditions such as Down syndrome and Rett syndrome . Prenatal exposure to substances. For example, drinking alcohol when pregnant can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorders . Certain infections in pregnancy Preterm birth Often there is no cure, but treatment can help the symptoms. Treatments include physical, speech, and occupational therapy. Special education classes and psychological counseling can also help. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is dual diagnosis? If you have a dual diagnosis, that means that you have both a mental disorder and a substance use disorder (SUD), either with alcohol or drugs . A dual diagnosis is a type of comorbidity, which is when someone has two disorders at the same time. Another name for this is co-occurring disorders. Mental and substance use disorders often occur together. Many people who develop SUDs are also diagnosed with mental disorders. And the reverse is true; many people with mental disorders will develop an SUD. Having both types of disorders is even more common in teenagers, people with serious mental illness, and people with certain mental disorders. Why do substance use disorders and mental disorders occur together? Although these problems often occur together, this does not mean that one caused the other, even if one appeared first. In fact, it can be hard to figure out which came first. Researchers think that there are three possible reasons as to why they often occur together: Common risk factors can contribute to both mental disorders and SUDs. These factors include: Genetics. Stress . Trauma, especially in childhood. Veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are also at risk for SUDs Mental disorders can contribute to drug use and SUDs. For example, people with mental disorders may use drugs or alcohol to try to feel better temporarily. This is known as self-medication. Also, mental disorders may change the brain to make it more likely that you will become addicted. Substance use and addiction can contribute to the development of a mental disorder. Substance use may change the brain in ways that make you more likely to develop a mental disorder. What are the treatments for dual diagnosis? If you have a dual diagnosis, it is usually better to treat both conditions at the same time rather than separately. You and your health care provider can work on a treatment plan that fits your needs.The plan should take into account your age, which substance(s) you are misusing, and which specific mental disorder(s) you have. The plan may include: Behavioral therapy, such as talk therapy (psychotherapy), long-term residential treatment (which combines housing and treatment services), and therapies to help you stay motivated to stick with your treatment plan. Medicines. There are effective medicines that treat opioid , alcohol , and nicotine addiction. There are also medicines that can lessen the symptoms of many mental disorders. Some medicines may treat more than one disorder. A referral to a support group. Support groups can give you emotional and social support. They are also a place where people can share tips about how to deal with day-to-day challenges. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What are eating disorders? Eating disorders are serious mental health disorders. They involve severe problems with your thoughts about food and your eating behaviors. You may eat much less or much more than you need. Eating disorders are medical conditions; they are not a lifestyle choice. They affect your body's ability to get proper nutrition. This can lead to health issues, such as heart and kidney problems, or sometimes even death. But there are treatments that can help. What are the types of eating disorders? Common types of eating disorders include: Binge-eating , which is out-of-control eating. People with binge-eating disorder keep eating even after they are full. They often eat until they feel very uncomfortable. Afterward, they usually have feelings of guilt, shame, and distress. Eating too much too often can lead to weight gain and obesity . Binge-eating disorder is the most common eating disorder in the U.S. Bulimia nervosa. People with bulimia nervosa also have periods of binge-eating. But afterwards, they purge, by making themselves throw up or using laxatives. They may also over-exercise or fast. People with bulimia nervosa may be slightly underweight, normal weight, or overweight. Anorexia nervosa. People with anorexia nervosa avoid food, severely restrict food, or eat very small quantities of only certain foods. They may see themselves as overweight, even when they are dangerously underweight. Anorexia nervosa is the least common of the three eating disorders, but it is often the most serious. It has the highest death rate of any mental disorder. What causes eating disorders? The exact cause of eating disorders is unknown. Researchers believe that eating disorders are caused by a complex interaction of factors. These include genetic, biological, behavioral, psychological, and social factors. Who is at risk for eating disorders? Anyone can develop an eating disorder, but they are more common in women. Eating disorders frequently appear during the teen years or young adulthood. But people can also develop them during childhood or later in life. What are the symptoms of eating disorders? The symptoms of eating disorders vary, depending on the disorder: The symptoms of binge-eating include: Eating unusually large amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as a 2-hour period Eating even when you're full or not hungry Eating fast during binge episodes Eating until you're uncomfortably full Eating alone or in secret to avoid embarrassment Feeling distressed, ashamed, or guilty about your eating Frequently dieting, possibly without weight loss The symptoms of bulimia nervosa include the same symptoms as binge-eating, plus trying to get rid of the food or weight after binging by: Purging, making yourself throw up or using laxatives or enemas to speed up the movement of food through your body Doing intensive and excessive exercise Fasting Over time, bulimia nervosa can cause health problems such as: Chronically inflamed and sore throat Swollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw area Worn tooth enamel and increasingly sensitive and decaying teeth . This is caused by the exposure to stomach acid every time you throw up. GERD (acid reflux) and other gastrointestinal problems Severe dehydration from purging Electrolyte imbalance , which could be too low or too high levels of sodium, calcium, potassium and other minerals. This can lead to a stroke or heart attack . The symptoms of anorexia nervosa include: Eating very little, to the point of starving yourself Intensive and excessive exercise Extreme thinness Intense fear of gaining weight Distorted body image - seeing yourself as overweight even when you are severely underweight Over time, anorexia nervosa can cause health problems such as: Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis ) Mild anemia Muscle wasting and weakness Thin, brittle hair and nails Dry, blotchy, or yellowish skin Growth of fine hair all over the body Severe constipation Low blood pressure Slowed breathing and pulse Feeling cold all the time because of a drop in internal body temperature Feeling faint, dizzy , or weak Feeling tired all the time Infertility Damage to the structure and function of the heart Brain damage Multiorgan failure Anorexia nervosa can be fatal. Some people with this disorder die of complications from starvation, and others die of suicide . Some people with eating disorders may also have other mental disorders (such as depression or anxiety ) or problems with substance use . How is eating disorders diagnosed? Because eating disorders can be so serious, it is important to seek help if you or a loved one thinks that you might have a problem. Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. It is important to be honest about your eating and exercise behaviors so your provider can help you. A physical exam Blood or urine tests to rule out other possible causes of your symptoms Other tests to see whether you have any other health problems caused by the eating disorder. These can include kidney function tests and an electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG). What are the treatments for eating disorders? Treatment plans for eating disorders are tailored to individual needs. You will likely have a team of providers helping you, including doctors, nutritionists, nurses, and therapists. The treatments may include: Individual, group, and/or family psychotherapy. Individual therapy may include cognitive behavioral approaches, which help you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns. Medical care and monitoring, including care for the complications that eating disorders can cause Nutrition counseling. Doctors, nurses, and counselors will help you eat healthy to reach and maintain a healthy weight. Medicines, such as antidepressants , antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers, may help treat some eating disorders. The medicines can also help with the depression and anxiety symptoms that often go along with eating disorders. Some people with serious eating disorders may need to be in a hospital or in a residential treatment program. Residential treatment programs combine housing and treatment services. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is mental health? Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress , relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, from childhood and adolescence through adulthood and aging . Why is mental health important? Mental health is important because it can help you to: Cope with the stresses of life Be physically healthy Have good relationships Make meaningful contributions to your community Work productively Realize your full potential How can I improve my mental health? There are many different things you can do to improve your mental health, including: Staying positive. It's important to try to have a positive outlook; some ways to do that include: Finding balance between positive and negative emotions.  Staying positive doesn't mean that you never feel negative emotions, such as sadness or anger. You need to feel them so that you can move through difficult situations. They can help you to respond to a problem. But you don't want those emotions to take over. For example, it's not helpful to keep thinking about bad things that happened in the past or worry too much about the future. Trying to hold on to the positive emotions when you have them Taking a break from negative information. Know when to stop watching or reading the news. Use social media to reach out for support and feel connected to others but be careful. Don't fall for rumors, get into arguments, or negatively compare your life to others. Practicing gratitude , which means being thankful for the good things in your life. It's helpful to do this every day, either by thinking about what you are grateful for or writing it down in a journal. These can be big things, such as the support you have from loved ones, or little things, such as enjoying a nice meal. It's important to allow yourself a moment to enjoy that you had the positive experience.  Practicing gratitude can help you to see your life differently. For example, when you are stressed, you may not notice that there are also moments when you have some positive emotions. Gratitude can help you to recognize them. Taking care of your physical health , since your physical and mental health are connected. Some ways to take care of your physical health include: Being physically active . Exercise can reduce feelings of stress and depression and improve your mood. Getting enough sleep . Sleep affects your mood. If you don't get a good sleep, you may become more easily annoyed and angry. Over the long term, a lack of quality sleep can make you more likely to become depressed. So it's important to make sure that you have a regular sleep schedule and get enough quality sleep every night. Healthy eating . Good nutrition will help you feel better physically but could also improve your mood and decrease anxiety and stress. Also, not having enough of certain nutrients may contribute to some mental illnesses. For example, there may be a link between low levels of vitamin B12 and depression. Eating a well-balanced diet can help you to get enough of the nutrients you need. Connecting with others. Humans are social creatures, and it's important to have strong, healthy relationships with others. Having good social support may help protect you against the harms of stress. It is also good to have different types of connections. Besides connecting with family and friends, you could find ways to get involved with your community or neighborhood. For example, you could volunteer for a local organization or join a group that is focused on a hobby you enjoy. Developing a sense of meaning and purpose in life. This could be through your job, volunteering, learning new skills, or exploring your spirituality. Developing coping skills , which are methods you use to deal with stressful situations. They may help you face a problem, take action, be flexible, and not easily give up in solving it. Meditation , which is a mind and body practice where you learn to focus your attention and awareness. There are many types, including mindfulness meditation and transcendental meditation. Meditation usually involves: A quiet location with as few distractions as possible A specific, comfortable posture. This could be sitting, lying down, walking, or another position. A focus of attention, such as a specially chosen word or set of words, an object, or your breathing An open attitude, where you try to let distractions come and go naturally without judging them Relaxation techniques are practices you do to produce your body's natural relaxation response. This slows down your breathing, lowers your blood pressure, and reduces muscle tension and stress. Types of relaxation techniques include: Progressive relaxation, where you tighten and relax different muscle groups, sometimes while using mental imagery or breathing exercises Guided imagery, where you learn to focus on positive images in your mind, to help you feel more relaxed and focused Biofeedback, where you use electronic devices to learn to control certain body functions, such as breathing, heart rate, and muscle tension Self-hypnosis, where the goal is to get yourself into a relaxed, trance-like state when you hear a certain suggestion or see a specific cue Deep breathing exercises, which involve focusing on taking slow, deep, even breaths It's also important to recognize when you need to get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders . If you don't know where to get treatment, start by contacting your primary care provider.

What is a learning disability? Learning disabilities are conditions that affect the ability to learn. They can cause problems with: Understanding what people are saying Speaking Reading Writing Doing math Paying attention Often, children have more than one kind of learning disability. They may also have another condition, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which can make learning even more of a challenge. What causes learning disabilities? Learning disabilities don't have anything to do with intelligence. They are caused by differences in the brain, and they affect the way the brain processes information. These differences are usually present at birth. But there are certain factors that can play a role in the development of a learning disability, including: Genetics Environmental exposures (such as lead ) Problems during pregnancy (such as the mother's drug use ) How do I know if my child has a learning disability? The earlier you can find and treat a learning disability, the better. Unfortunately, learning disabilities are usually not recognized until a child is in school. If you notice that your child is struggling, talk to your child's teacher or health care provider about an evaluation for a learning disability. The evaluation may include a medical exam, a discussion of family history, and intellectual and school performance testing. What are the treatments for learning disabilities? The most common treatment for learning disabilities is special education. A teacher or other learning specialist can help your child learn skills by building on strengths and finding ways to make up for weaknesses. Educators may try special teaching methods, make changes to the classroom, or use technologies that can assist your child's learning needs. Some children also get help from tutors or speech or language therapists. A child with a learning disability may struggle with low self-esteem, frustration, and other problems. Mental health professionals can help your child understand these feelings, develop coping tools, and build healthy relationships. If your child has another condition such as ADHD, he or she will need treatment for that condition as well. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Every day, you have different experiences and you learn new things. Your brain cannot store all of that information, so it has to decide what is worth remembering. Memory is the process of storing and then remembering this information. There are different types of memory. Short-term memory stores information for a few seconds or minutes. Long-term memory stores it for a longer period of time. Memory doesn't always work perfectly. As you grow older, it may take longer to remember things. It's normal to forget things once in a while. We've all forgotten a name, where we put our keys, or if we locked the front door. If you are an older adult who forget things more often than others your age, you may have mild cognitive impairment . Forgetting how to use your phone or find your way home may be signs of a more serious problem, such as: Alzheimer's disease Other types of dementia Stroke Depression Head injuries Blood clots or tumors in the brain Kidney , liver , or thyroid problems Reactions to certain medicines If you're worried about your forgetfulness, see your health care provider. NIH: National Institute on Aging

What are mental disorders? Mental disorders (or mental illnesses) are conditions that affect your thinking, feeling, mood, and behavior. They may happen over a short period of time or come and go. Some can be chronic (long-lasting). They can affect your ability to relate to others and function each day.. What are some types of mental disorders? There are many different types of mental disorders. Some common ones include: Anxiety disorders , including panic disorder , obsessive-compulsive disorder , and phobias Depression , bipolar disorder , and other mood disorders Eating disorders Personality disorders Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Psychotic disorders , including schizophrenia What causes mental disorders? There is no single cause for mental illness. A number of factors can contribute to risk for mental illness, such as: Your genes and family history Your life experiences, such as stress or a history of abuse, especially if they happen in childhood Biological factors such as chemical imbalances in the brain A traumatic brain injury (TBI) Prenatal (before birth) exposure to viruses , toxic chemicals , or other substances such as alcohol and drugs. Use of alcohol or recreational drugs Having a serious medical condition like cancer Having few friends, and feeling lonely or isolated Mental disorders are not caused by character flaws. They have nothing to do with being lazy or weak. Who is at risk for mental disorders? Mental disorders are common. Many Americans will be diagnosed with a mental disorder at some time in their life. How are mental disorders diagnosed? The steps to getting a diagnosis include: A medical history A physical exam and possibly lab tests, if your provider thinks that other medical conditions could be causing your symptoms A psychological evaluation . You will answer questions about your thinking, feelings, and behaviors. What are the treatments for mental disorders? Treatment depends on which mental disorder you have and how serious it is. You and your provider will work on a treatment plan just for you. It usually involves some type of therapy. You may also take medicines. Some people also need social support and education on managing their condition. In some cases, you may need more intensive treatment. You may need to go to a psychiatric hospital.  This could be because your mental illness is severe. Or it could be because you are at risk of hurting yourself or someone else. In the hospital, you will get counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients.

What is mental health? Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being.  It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress , relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, from childhood and adolescence through adulthood and aging . What are mental disorders? Mental disorders are serious conditions that can affect your thinking, mood, and behavior. They may be occasional or long-lasting. They can affect your ability to relate to others and function each day. Mental disorders are common; many Americans will be diagnosed with one at some time in their life. But there are treatments. People with mental disorders can get better, and many of them recover completely. Why is mental health important? Mental health is important because it can help you to: Cope with the stresses of life Be physically healthy Have good relationships Make meaningful contributions to your community Work productively Realize your full potential Your mental health is also important because it can affect your physical health. For example, mental disorders can raise your risk for physical health problems such as stroke , type 2 diabetes , and heart disease . What can affect my mental health? There are many different factors that can affect your mental health, including: Biological factors, such as genes or brain chemistry Life experiences, such as trauma or abuse Family history of mental health problems Your lifestyle, such as diet, physical activity, and substance use You can also affect your mental health by taking steps to improve it , such as doing meditation, using relaxation techniques, and practicing gratitude. Can my mental health change over time? Over time, your mental health can change. For example, you may be dealing with a difficult situation, such as trying to manage a chronic illness, taking care of an ill relative, or facing money problems. The situation may wear you out and overwhelm your ability to cope with it. This can worsen your mental health. On the other hand, getting therapy may improve your mental health. What are the signs that I might have a mental health problem? When it comes to your emotions, it can be hard to know what is normal and what is not. There are warning signs that you may have a mental health problem, including: A change in your eating or sleeping habits Withdrawing from the people and activities you enjoy Having low or no energy Feeling numb or like nothing matters Having unexplained aches and pains Feeling helpless or hopeless Smoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usual Feeling unusually confused, forgetful, angry, upset, worried, or scared Having severe mood swings that cause problems in your relationships Having thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your head Hearing voices or believing things that are not true Thinking of harming yourself or others Not being able to perform daily tasks like taking care of your kids or getting to work or school What should I do if I think I have a mental health problem? If you think that you may have a mental health problem, get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders. If you don't know where to start, contact your primary care provider.

Some forgetfulness can be a normal part of aging.   However, some people have more memory problems than other people their age. This condition is called mild cognitive impairment, or MCI. People with MCI can take care of themselves and do their normal activities. MCI memory problems may include: Losing things often Forgetting to go to events and appointments Having more trouble coming up with words than other people of the same age Memory problems can also have other causes, including certain medicines and diseases that affect the blood vessels that supply the brain. Some of the problems brought on by these conditions can be managed or reversed. Your health care provider can do thinking, memory, and language tests to see if you have MCI. You may also need to see a specialist for more tests. Because MCI may be an early sign of Alzheimer's disease , it's really important to see your health care provider every 6 to 12 months. At this time, there is no proven drug treatment for MCI. Your health care provider can check to see if you have any changes in your memory or thinking skills over time. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Most people feel sad or irritable from time to time. They may say they're in a bad mood. A mood disorder is different. It affects a person's everyday emotional state. Nearly one in ten people aged 18 and older have mood disorders. These include depression and bipolar disorder (also called manic depression). Mood disorders can increase a person's risk for heart disease, diabetes, and other diseases. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, or a combination of both. With treatment, most people with mood disorders can lead productive lives.

What is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental disorder in which you have thoughts (obsessions) and rituals (compulsions) over and over. They interfere with your life, but you cannot control or stop them. What causes obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? The cause of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, and your environment may play a role. Who is at risk for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) usually begins when you are a teen or young adult. Boys often develop OCD at a younger age than girls. Risk factors for OCD include: Family history. People with a first-degree relative (such as a parent, sibling, or child) who has OCD are at higher risk. This is especially true if the relative developed OCD as a child or teen. Brain structure and functioning. Imaging studies have shown that people with OCD have differences in certain parts of the brain. Researchers need to do more studies to understand the connection between the brain differences and OCD. Childhood trauma, such as child abuse . Some studies have found a link between trauma in childhood and OCD. More research is needed to understand this relationship better. In some cases, children may develop OCD or OCD symptoms following a streptococcal infection . This is called Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal Infections (PANDAS). What are the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? People with OCD may have symptoms of obsessions, compulsions, or both: Obsessions are repeated thoughts, urges, or mental images that cause anxiety . They may involve things such as Fear of germs or contamination Fear of losing or misplacing something Worries about harm coming towards yourself or others Unwanted forbidden thoughts involving sex or religion Aggressive thoughts towards yourself or others Needing things lined up exactly or arranged in a particular, precise way Compulsions are behaviors that you feel like you need to do over and over to try to reduce your anxiety or stop the obsessive thoughts. Some common compulsions include Excessive cleaning and/or handwashing Repeatedly checking on things, such as whether the door is locked or the oven is off Compulsive counting Ordering and arranging things in a particular, precise way Some people with OCD also have Tourette syndrome or another tic disorder. Tics are sudden twitches, movements, or sounds that people do over and over. People who have tics cannot stop their body from doing these things. How is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) diagnosed? The first step is to talk with your health care provider about your symptoms. It's important to check whether a physical problem is causing your symptoms. So your provider will do a physical exam and will ask you about your medical history. If  your symptoms do not seem to be caused by a physical problem, your provider may do an OCD test or may refer you to a mental health specialist for further evaluation or treatment. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) can sometimes be hard to diagnose. Its symptoms are like those of other mental disorders, such as anxiety disorders. It is also possible to have both OCD and another mental disorder. Not everyone who has obsessions or compulsions has OCD. Your symptoms would usually be considered OCD when you: Can't control your thoughts or behaviors, even when you know that they are excessive Spend at least 1 hour a day on these thoughts or behaviors Don't get pleasure when performing the behaviors. But doing them may briefly give you relief from the anxiety. Have significant problems in your daily life because of these thoughts or behaviors What are the treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? The main treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) are cognitive behavioral therapy, medicines, or both: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy. It teaches you different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to your obsessions and compulsions. Exposure and Response Prevention (ERP) s a specific type of CBT. ERP involves gradually exposing you to your fears or obsessions. You learn healthy ways to deal with the anxiety they cause. Medicines for OCD include certain types of antidepressants . If those don't work for you, your provider may suggest taking some other type of psychiatric medicine. If you have severe OCD that does not get better with these treatments, your provider may suggest a treatment called repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). It is a brain stimulation procedure that uses magnetic waves. It can target specific brain areas associated with OCD. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, including as we age. Many older adults are at risk for mental health problems. But this does not mean that mental health problems are a normal part of aging. Studies show that most older adults feel satisfied with their lives, even though they may have more illnesses or physical problems. Sometimes, however, important life changes can make you feel uneasy, stressed, and sad. These changes could include the death of a loved one, retirement, or dealing with a serious illness. Many older adults will eventually adjust to the changes. But some people will have more trouble adjusting. This can put them at risk for mental disorders such as depression and anxiety . It's important to recognize and treat mental disorders in older adults. These disorders don't just cause mental suffering. They can also make it harder for you to manage other health problems. This is especially true if those health problems are chronic. Some of the warning signs of mental disorders in older adults include: Changes in mood or energy level A change in your eating or sleeping habits Withdrawing from the people and activities you enjoy Feeling unusually confused, forgetful, angry, upset, worried, or scared Feeling numb or like nothing matters Having unexplained aches and pains Feeling sadness or hopelessness Smoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usual Anger, irritability, or aggressiveness Having thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your head Hearing voices or believing things that are not true Thinking of harming yourself or others If you think that you may have a mental health problem, get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders. If you don't know where to start, contact your primary care provider.

What is panic disorder? Panic disorder is a type of anxiety disorder .  It causes repeated panic attacks, which are sudden periods of intense fear, discomfort, or a sense of losing control. These attacks happen even though there is no real danger. They often cause physical symptoms. For example, you may have a rapid or pounding heartbeat and feel like you are having a heart attack . If you have panic attacks, it doesn't mean you will develop a panic disorder. Many people only have one or two panic attacks in their lifetime and get better without treatment. But some of the people who have panic attacks do develop panic disorder. They have repeated panic attacks. The attacks can happen as often as several times a day or as rarely as a few times a year. People with panic disorder often worry about having another attack. It may cause them to avoid places and situations where they had panic attacks in the past. Panic disorder is not life-threatening, but it can be upsetting and affect your quality of life. And if it is not treated, it can sometimes lead to other health conditions, including depression and substance use disorders. What causes panic disorder? The cause of panic disorder is unknown. Researchers think that certain factors may play a role: Genetics - panic disorder sometimes runs in families. But no one knows for sure why some family members have it while others don't. Brain biology and chemistry. Your environment. Major stress . Who is more likely to develop panic disorder? Panic disorder is more common in women than men. It often starts in the late teens or early adulthood. Sometimes it starts when a person is under a lot of stress. People who have had trauma, especially in childhood, are more likely to develop panic disorder. What are the symptoms of panic disorder? People with panic disorder may have: Sudden and repeated panic attacks of overwhelming anxiety and fear A feeling of being out of control or a fear of death during a panic attack An intense worry about another panic attack A fear or avoidance of places and situations where they had panic attacks in the past Physical symptoms during a panic attack, such as: Pounding or racing heart Sweating or chills Trembling or shaking Trouble breathing The feeling that they are choking Weakness or dizziness Chest pain Stomach pain or nausea Panic attacks can happen anytime, without warning. They can last anywhere from a few minutes to over an hour. How is panic disorder diagnosed? To find out if you have panic disorder, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history and symptoms May check if an unrelated physical problem is causing your symptoms, for example with: A physical exam Blood tests to check for thyroid problems and other possible conditions Heart health tests May do a panic disorder test May refer you to a mental health provider for the panic disorder test or other types of psychological evaluations What are the treatments for panic disorder? Treatment for panic disorder usually includes one or more of the following: Talk therapy , also called psychotherapy or counseling, which can help you understand your feelings. It may include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), a type of talk therapy that helps you change your negative thoughts and how you react to things that cause you to feel anxiety. Medicines , including: Antidepressants , such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) Anti-anxiety medicines Your provider may also suggest that you follow a healthy lifestyle, which may help with panic disorder. It may include: Avoiding alcohol Reducing caffeine Eating regular meals Getting enough sleep Getting regular exercise Joining a support group may also be helpful. Support groups can make you feel like you are not alone, and you may learn some new tips on how to cope. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is personality? Your personality is your own way of thinking, feeling, behaving, and relating to others. Once you become an adult, your personality usually doesn't change much. What are personality disorders? Personality disorders are a group of mental disorders . They involve long-term patterns of thoughts and behaviors that are different from what is considered normal in your culture. The thoughts and behaviors are unhealthy and inflexible. They cause serious problems with relationships, work, and social activities. They can make it hard to deal with everyday stresses and problems. What are the types of personality disorders? There are 10 types of personality disorders. They are grouped into three different categories called clusters. The types in each cluster have some similar symptoms and characteristics. The clusters and types are: Cluster A personality disorders involve unusual and odd thoughts and behaviors. It includes: Paranoid personality disorder, in which a person has paranoia (an extreme fear and distrust of others). They may think that someone is trying to harm them. Schizoid personality disorder, in which a person prefers to be alone and is not interested in having relationships with others. Schizotypal personality disorder, in which a person has unusual thoughts and ways of behaving and speaking. They are uncomfortable having close relationships with others. Cluster B personality disorders involve dramatic and emotional thoughts and behaviors that can keep changing. It includes: Antisocial personality disorder, in which a person has a long-term pattern of manipulating, exploiting, or violating the rights of others. Borderline personality disorder, in which a person has lots of trouble managing their emotions. This makes them impulsive and uncertain about how they see themselves. It can cause a lot of trouble in their relationships. Histrionic personality disorder, in which a person is dramatic, has strong emotions, and always wants attention from others. Narcissistic personality disorder, in which a person lacks empathy and wants to be admired by others. They think that they are better than others and that they deserve special treatment. Cluster C personality disorders involve anxious and fearful thoughts and behaviors. It includes: Avoidant personality disorder, in which a person is very shy and feels that they are not as good as others. They often avoid people because they fear rejection. Dependent personality disorder, in which a person depends too much on others and feels that they need to be taken care of. They may let others treat them badly because they are afraid of losing the relationship. Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, in which a person needs control and order. They are perfectionists and can be inflexible. Although some of the symptoms are similar, this is not the same thing as obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). What causes personality disorders? Personality disorders usually begin when someone is in their teens or early adult years. The cause is unknown. However, genes and childhood experiences such as abuse and trauma likely play a role. What are the symptoms of personality disorders? The symptoms of each personality disorder are different. But each disorder involves problems and uncertainty with how people see themselves. The disorders also cause problems in relationships with other people. People with personality disorders may have trouble realizing that they have a problem. To them, their thoughts are normal. They may see others as the problem. So they may not seek help when they need it. Or, if they seek help, it may be because of another reason. They may be looking for help because of other mental health symptoms or problems with relationships and work. Sometimes someone else, such as a family member or social agency, may ask them to get help. How are personality disorders diagnosed? A mental health care provider can diagnose personality disorders. A mental health provider is a health care professional who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health problems. To make a diagnosis, the provider will consider the person's symptoms, experiences, and family medical history. A thorough medical exam may also be done to help rule out other possible causes of the symptoms. How are personality disorders treated? Talk therapy, also known as psychotherapy, is the main treatment for personality disorders. Medicines may help relieve certain symptoms, such as anxiety or mood swings.

A phobia is a type of anxiety disorder .  It is a strong, irrational fear of something that poses little or no real danger. There are many specific phobias. Acrophobia is a fear of heights. Agoraphobia is a fear of public places, and claustrophobia is a fear of closed-in places. If you become anxious and extremely self-conscious in everyday social situations, you could have a social phobia. Other common phobias involve tunnels, highway driving, water, flying, animals and blood. People with phobias try to avoid what they are afraid of. If they cannot, they may experience: Panic and fear Rapid heartbeat Shortness of breath Trembling A strong desire to get away Phobias usually start in children or teens, and continue into adulthood. The causes of specific phobias are not known, but they sometimes run in families. Treatment helps most people with phobias. Options include medicines, therapy or both. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Many women have the baby blues after childbirth. If you have the baby blues, you may have mood swings, feel sad, anxious or overwhelmed, have crying spells, lose your appetite, or have trouble sleeping. The baby blues most often go away within a few days or a week. The symptoms are not severe and do not need treatment. The symptoms of postpartum depression last longer and are more severe.   You may also feel hopeless and worthless and lose interest in the baby. You may have thoughts of hurting yourself or the baby. Very rarely, new mothers develop something even more serious. They may have hallucinations or try to hurt themselves or the baby. They need to get treatment right away, often in the hospital. Postpartum depression can begin anytime within the first year after childbirth. The cause is unknown. Hormonal and physical changes after birth and the stress of caring for a new baby may play a role. Women who have had depression are at higher risk. If you think you have postpartum depression, tell your health care provider. Medicines, including antidepressants , and talk therapy can help you get well. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental health disorder that some people develop after they experience or see a traumatic event. The traumatic event may be life-threatening, such as combat, a natural disaster , a car accident, or sexual assault . But sometimes the event is not necessarily a dangerous one. For example, the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also cause PTSD. It's normal to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. The fear triggers a "fight-or-flight" response. This is your body's way of helping to protect itself from possible harm. It causes changes in your body such as the release of certain hormones and increases in alertness, blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing. In time, most people recover from this naturally. But people with PTSD don't feel better. They feel stressed and frightened long after the trauma is over. In some cases, the PTSD symptoms may start later on. They might also come and go over time. What causes post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? Researchers don't know why some people get PTSD and others don't. Genetics, neurobiology, risk factors, and personal factors may affect whether you get PTSD after a traumatic event. Who is more likely to develop post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? You can develop PTSD at any age. Many risk factors play a part in whether you will develop PTSD. They include: Your sex; women are more likely to develop PTSD Having had trauma in childhood Feeling horror, helplessness, or extreme fear Going through a traumatic event that lasts a long time Having little or no social support after the event Dealing with extra stress after the event, such as loss of a loved one, pain and injury, or loss of a job or home Having a history of mental illness or substance use What are the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? There are four types of PTSD symptoms, but they may not be the same for everyone. Each person experiences symptoms in their own way. The types are: Re-experiencing symptoms , when something reminds you of the trauma and you feel that fear again. Examples include Flashbacks, which cause you to feel like you are going through the event again Nightmares Frightening thoughts Avoidance symptoms , when you try to avoid situations or people that trigger memories of the traumatic event. This may cause you to Stay away from places, events, or objects that are reminders of the traumatic experience. For example, if you were in a car accident, you might stop driving. Avoiding thoughts or feelings related to the traumatic event. For example, you might try to stay very busy to try to avoid thinking about what happened. Arousal and reactivity symptoms , which may cause you to be jittery or be on the lookout for danger. They include Being easily startled Feeling tense or "on edge" Having difficulty sleeping Having angry outbursts Cognition and mood symptoms , which are negative changes in beliefs and feelings. They include Trouble remembering important things about the traumatic event Negative thoughts about yourself or the world Feeling blame and guilt No longer being interested in things you enjoyed Trouble concentrating The symptoms usually start soon after the traumatic event. But sometimes they may not appear until months or years later. They also may come and go over many years. If your symptoms last longer than four weeks, cause you great distress, or interfere with your work or home life, you might have PTSD. How is post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) diagnosed? A health care provider who has experience helping people with mental illnesses can diagnose PTSD. The provider will do a mental health screening and may also do a physical exam. To get a diagnosis of PTSD, you must have all of these symptoms for at least one month: At least one re-experiencing symptom At least one avoidance symptom At least two arousal and reactivity symptoms At least two cognition and mood symptoms What are the treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? The main treatments for PTSD are talk therapy, medicines, or both. PTSD affects people differently, so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. If you have PTSD, you need to work with a mental health professional to find the best treatment for your symptoms.: Talk therapy , or psychotherapy, can teach you about your symptoms. You will learn how to identify what triggers them and how to manage them. There are different types of talk therapy for PTSD. Medicines can help with the symptoms of PTSD. Antidepressants may help control symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Other medicines can help with sleep problems and nightmares. Can post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) be prevented? There are certain factors that can help reduce the risk of developing PTSD. These are known as resilience factors, and they include: Seeking out support from other people, such as friends, family, or a support group Learning to feel good about your actions in the face of danger Having a coping strategy or a way of getting through the bad event and learning from it Being able to act and respond effectively despite feeling fear NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a rare genetic disorder. It causes poor muscle tone, low levels of sex hormones and a constant feeling of hunger. The part of the brain that controls feelings of fullness or hunger does not work properly in people with PWS. They overeat, leading to obesity . Babies with PWS are usually floppy, with poor muscle tone, and have trouble sucking. Boys may have undescended testicles. Later, other signs appear. These include: Short stature Poor motor skills Weight gain Underdeveloped sex organs Mild intellectual and learning disabilities There is no cure for PWS. Growth hormone, exercise, and dietary supervision can help build muscle mass and control weight. Other treatments may include sex hormones and behavior therapy. Most people with PWS will need specialized care and supervision throughout their lives. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Psychotic disorders are severe mental disorders that cause abnormal thinking and perceptions. People with psychoses lose touch with reality. Two of the main symptoms are delusions and hallucinations. Delusions are false beliefs, such as thinking that someone is plotting against you or that the TV is sending you secret messages. Hallucinations are false perceptions, such as hearing, seeing, or feeling something that is not there. Schizophrenia is one type of psychotic disorder. People with bipolar disorder may also have psychotic symptoms. Other problems that can cause psychosis include alcohol and some drugs, brain tumors, brain infections, and stroke. Treatment depends on the cause of the psychosis. It might involve drugs to control symptoms and talk therapy. Hospitalization is an option for serious cases where a person might be dangerous to himself or others.

Schizophrenia is a serious brain illness. People who have it may hear voices that aren't there. They may think other people are trying to hurt them. Sometimes they don't make sense when they talk. The disorder makes it hard for them to keep a job or take care of themselves. Symptoms of schizophrenia usually start between ages 16 and 30. Men often develop symptoms at a younger age than women. People usually do not get schizophrenia after age 45. There are three types of symptoms: Psychotic symptoms distort a person's thinking.  These include hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not there), delusions (beliefs that are not true), trouble organizing thoughts, and strange movements. "Negative" symptoms make it difficult to show emotions and to function normally. A person may seem depressed and withdrawn. Cognitive symptoms affect the thought process.  These include trouble using information, making decisions, and paying attention. No one is sure what causes schizophrenia.  Your genes, environment, and brain chemistry may play a role. There is no cure. Medicine can help control many of the symptoms. You may need to try different medicines to see which works best. You should stay on your medicine for as long as your doctor recommends. Additional treatments can help you deal with your illness from day to day.  These include therapy, family education, rehabilitation, and skills training. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a type of depression that comes and goes with the seasons. It usually starts in the late fall and early winter and goes away during the spring and summer. Some people do have episodes of depression that start in the spring or summer, but that is a lot less common. Symptoms of SAD may include: Sadness Gloomy outlook Feeling hopeless, worthless, and irritable Loss of interest or pleasure in activities you used to enjoy Low energy Difficulty sleeping or oversleeping Carbohydrate cravings and weight gain Thoughts of death or suicide SAD is more common in women, young people, and those who live far from the equator. You are also more likely to have SAD if you or your family members have depression. The exact causes of SAD are unknown. Researchers have found that people with SAD may have an imbalance of serotonin, a brain chemical that affects your mood. Their bodies also make too much melatonin, a hormone that regulates sleep, and not enough vitamin D. The main treatment for SAD is light therapy. The idea behind light therapy is to replace the sunshine that you miss during the fall and winter months. You sit in front of a light therapy box every morning to get daily exposure to bright, artificial light. But some people with SAD do not respond to light therapy alone. Antidepressant medicines and talk therapy can reduce SAD symptoms, either alone or combined with light therapy. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is self-harm? Self-harm, or self-injury, is when a person hurts his or her own body on purpose. The injuries may be minor, but sometimes they can be severe. They may leave permanent scars or cause serious health problems. Some examples are: Cutting yourself (such as using a razor blade, knife, or other sharp object to cut your skin) Punching yourself or punching things (like a wall) Burning yourself with cigarettes, matches, or candles Pulling out your hair Poking objects through body openings Breaking your bones or bruising yourself Self-harm is not a mental disorder. It is a behavior - an unhealthy way to cope with strong feelings. However, some of the people who harm themselves do have a mental disorder . People who harm themselves are usually not trying to attempt suicide .  But they are at higher risk of attempting suicide if they do not get help. Why do people harm themselves? There are different reasons why people harm themselves. Often, they have trouble coping and dealing with their feelings. They harm themselves to try to: Make themselves feel something (because they feel empty or numb inside) Block upsetting memories Show that they need help Release strong feelings that overwhelm them, such as anger, loneliness, or hopelessness Punish themselves Feel a sense of control Who is at risk for self-harm? There are people of all ages who harm themselves, but it usually starts in the teen or early adult years. Self-harm is more common in people who: Were abused or went through a trauma as children Have mental disorders, such as Depression Eating disorders Post-traumatic stress disorder Certain personality disorders Misuse drugs or alcohol Have friends who self-harm Have low self-esteem What are the signs of self-harm? Signs that someone may be hurting themselves include: Having frequent cuts, bruises, or scars Wearing long sleeves or pants even in hot weather Making excuses about injuries Having sharp objects around for no clear reason How can I help someone who self-harms? If someone you know is self-harming, it is important not to be judgmental. Let that person know that you want to help. If the person is a child or teenager, ask him or her to talk to a trusted adult. If he or she won't do that, talk to a trusted adult yourself. If the person who is self-harming is an adult, suggest mental health counseling. What the treatments are for self-harm? There are no medicines to treat self-harming behaviors. But there are medicines to treat any mental disorders that the person may have, such as anxiety and depression. Treating the mental disorder may weaken the urge to self-harm. Mental health counseling or therapy can also help by teaching the person: Problem-solving skills New ways to cope with strong emotions Better relationship skills Ways to strengthen self-esteem If the problem is severe, the person may need more intensive treatment in a psychiatric hospital or a mental health day program.

What is stress? Stress is how your brain and body respond to a challenge or demand. When you are stressed, your body releases certain hormones . Hormones are chemicals that travel in your bloodstream and control how different parts of your body work. The hormones that are released when you are stressed make you alert and ready to act. They can raise your blood pressure, heart rate, and blood glucose (blood sugar) levels. This response is sometimes called a "fight or flight" response. Everyone gets stressed from time to time. There are different types of stress. It can be short-term or long-term. It can be caused by something that happens once or something that keeps happening. Not all stress is bad. In fact, it can help you survive in a dangerous situation. For example, one kind of stress is the jolt you may feel when a car pulls out in front of you while you are driving. This jolt of hormones helps you quickly hit the brakes to avoid an accident. A little short-term stress can sometimes be helpful. For example, the stress of having a deadline for school or your job may push you to get your work done on time. Once you finish it, that stress goes away. But stress that lasts a long time can harm your health. What causes long-term stress? Long-term stress, or chronic stress, lasts for weeks, months, or longer. As you go about your life, your body is acting as if you're being threatened. Causes of long-term stress include: Routine stress from the demands of work, school, family needs, money problems, and other daily pressures that don't stop. Stress from sudden, difficult changes in your life, such as divorce, illness, losing your job, or other unhappy life events that often have a long impact. Traumatic stress, which may happen when you're in danger of serious harm or death. Examples include being in a bad accident, a war, a flood, earthquake, or other frightening event. This type of stress can cause a long-lasting problem called post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). How can long term-stress harm my health? People respond to stress in different ways. If you're stressed for a long time you may notice that you are: Getting sick more often than usual because stress weakens your body's ability to fight germs Having stomach problems or trouble digesting food Having trouble sleeping Having headaches Feeling sad, angry, or easily upset When stress keeps going, your body acts as if you're always in danger. That's a lot of strain that may play a part in developing serious health problems, including: Depression Anxiety Heart disease High blood pressure Diabetes It's possible to get used to the symptoms of stress and not even realize there's a problem. So when there's a lot of stress in your life, it's important to pay attention to how it affects you so you can do something about it. How can I manage long-term stress? Simple things that improve your mental health may be helpful in managing long-term stress, such as: Get regular exercise. A 30-minute daily walk can help you feel better and help keep your immune system strong, so you don't get sick. Try relaxing activities. You could look for an app or wellness program that uses breathing, meditation, or muscle relaxation exercises. Get enough sleep every night. Avoid too much caffeine . Decide what you need to do now and what can wait. And focus on what you got done each day, not on what you weren't able to do. Ask your family or friends for support. When should I ask my health care provider for help with stress? Get help if you're having severe symptoms for 2 weeks or more, including: Trouble sleeping Changes in your eating that cause unwanted changes in your weight Troubles getting out of bed because of your mood Difficulty focusing your thoughts Losing interest in things you usually enjoy Not being able to do your usual daily activities Always get help right away if stress is causing you to: Have thoughts of suicide Feel you can't cope Use drugs or alcohol more often than usual Your health care provider may refer you to a mental health professional such as a psychologist or social worker. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is suicide? Suicide is the taking of one's own life. It is a death that happens when someone harms themselves because they want to end their life. A suicide attempt is when someone harms themselves to try to end their life, but they do not die. Suicide is a major public health problem and a leading cause of death in the United States. Both suicide and suicide attempts can have lasting harmful effects: People who survive a suicide attempt may have serious injuries that can affect their long-term health. They may also have depression or other mental health concerns. When people die by suicide, it affects their family, friends, and community. They may feel grief, shock, anger, and guilt. Some may develop post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, or anxiety . They may also be at risk for suicidal thoughts. Who is at risk for suicide? Suicide does not discriminate. It can touch anyone, anywhere, at any time. But there are certain factors that can contribute to the risk of suicide, including: Having attempted suicide before Depression and other mental health disorders Alcohol or drug use disorder Family history of a mental health disorder Family history of an alcohol or drug use disorder Family history of suicide Family violence, including intimate partner violence , child abuse , or sexual abuse Having guns in the home Being in or having recently gotten out of prison or jail Being exposed to others' suicidal behavior, such as a family member, peer, or celebrity Medical illness, including chronic pain Stressful life event, such as a job loss, financial problems, loss of a loved one, a breakup of a relationship, etc. Being between the ages of 15 and 24 years or over age 60 What are the warning signs for suicide? The warning signs for suicide include: Talking about wanting to die or wanting to kill oneself Making a plan or looking for a way to kill oneself, such as searching online Buying a gun or stockpiling pills Feeling empty, hopeless, trapped, or like there's no reason to live Being in unbearable pain Talking about being a burden to others Using more alcohol or drugs Acting anxious or agitated; behaving recklessly Sleeping too little or too much Withdrawing from family or friends or feeling isolated Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge Displaying extreme mood swings Saying good-bye to loved ones, putting affairs in order Some people may tell others about their suicidal thoughts. But others may try to hide them. This can make some of the signs harder to spot. What should I do if I need help or know someone who does? If you or someone you know has the warning signs for suicide, get help right away , especially if there is a change in behavior. If it is an emergency, dial 911. Otherwise there are five steps that you can take: Ask the person if they're thinking about killing themselves. Keep them safe. Find out whether they have a plan for suicide and keep them away from things that they can use to kill themselves. Be there with them. Listen carefully and find out what they are thinking and feeling. Help them connect to resources that can help them, such as through: Calling or texting the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline at 988. Chatting through Lifeline Chat. For veterans, reaching the Veterans Crisis Line by: Calling 988 and then pressing 1. Texting to 838255. Chatting with them. Stay connected. Staying in touch after a crisis can make a difference. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is depression in teens? Depression in teens (ages 13-17) is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. It is an intense feeling of sadness, hopelessness, and anger or frustration that lasts much longer. These feelings make it hard for you to function normally and do your usual activities. You may also have trouble focusing and have no motivation or energy. Depression can make you feel like it is hard to enjoy life or even get through the day. What causes depression in teens? Many factors may play a role in depression, including: Genetics. Depression can run in families. Brain biology and chemistry. Hormones. Hormone changes can contribute to depression. Stressful childhood events such as trauma, the death of a loved one, bullying , and abuse . Which teens are at risk of depression? Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in the teens or early adulthood. Certain teens are at higher risk of depression, such as those who: Have other mental health conditions, such as anxiety , eating disorders , and substance use Have other diseases, such as diabetes , cancer , and heart disease Have family members with mental illness Have a dysfunctional family/family conflict Have problems with friends or other kids at school Have learning disabilities or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) Have had trauma in childhood Have low self-esteem, a pessimistic outlook, or poor coping skills Are members of the LGBTQIA+ community , especially when their families are not supportive What are the symptoms of depression in teens? If you have depression, you have one or more of these symptoms most of the time: Sadness Feeling of emptiness Hopelessness Being angry, irritable, or frustrated, even at minor things You also may also have other symptoms, such as: No longer caring about things you used to enjoy Changes in weight, such as losing weight when you are not dieting or gaining weight from eating too much Changes in sleep, such as having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, or sleeping much more than usual Feeling restless or having trouble sitting still Feeling very tired or not having energy Feeling worthless or very guilty Having trouble concentrating, remembering information, or making decisions Thinking about dying or suicide How is depression in teens diagnosed? If you think you might be depressed, tell someone that you trust, such as your: Parents or guardian Teacher or counselor Doctor The next step is to see your doctor for a checkup. Your doctor can first make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression. To do this, you may have a physical exam and lab tests. If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation . Your doctor may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. You may be asked about things such as: Your thoughts and feelings How you are doing at school Any changes in your eating, sleeping, or energy level Whether you are suicidal Whether you use alcohol or drugs How is depression in teens treated? Effective treatments for depression in teens include talk therapy, or a combination of talk therapy and medicines: Talk therapy Talk therapy, also called psychotherapy or counseling, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. It involves going to see a therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself. There are many different types of talk therapy. Certain types have been shown to help teens deal with depression, including: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which helps you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns. Interpersonal therapy (IPT), which focuses on improving your relationships. It helps you understand and work through troubled relationships that may contribute to your depression. IPT may help you change behaviors that are causing problems.  You also explore major issues that may add to your depression, such as grief or life changes. Medicines In some cases, your doctor will suggest medicines along with talk therapy. There are a few antidepressants that have been widely studied and proven to help teens. If you are taking medicine for depression, it is important to see your doctor regularly. It is also important to know that it will take some time for you to get relief from antidepressants: It can take 3 to 4 weeks until an antidepressant takes effect You may have to try more than one antidepressant to find one that works for you It can also take some time to find the right dose of an antidepressant In some cases, teenagers may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants. This risk is higher in the first few weeks after starting the medicine and when the dose is changed. Make sure to tell your parents or guardian if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself. You should not stop taking the antidepressants on your own. You need to work with your doctor to slowly and safely decrease the dose before you stop. Programs for severe depression Some teens who have severe depression or are at risk of hurting themselves may need more intensive treatment. They may go into a psychiatric hospital or do a day program. Both offer counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients. Day programs may be full-day or half-day, and they often last for several weeks.

As a teenager, you go through many physical, mental, emotional, and social changes. The biggest change is puberty , the process of becoming sexually mature.  It usually happens between ages 10 and 14 for girls and ages 12 and 16 for boys.   As your body changes, you may have questions about sexual health . During this time, you start to develop your own unique personality and opinions.  Some changes that you might notice include: Increased independence from your parents More concerns about body image and clothes More influence from peers Greater ability to sense right and wrong All of these changes can sometimes seem overwhelming.  Some sadness or moodiness can be normal.  But feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthless could be warning signs of a mental health problem . If you need help, talk to your parents, school counselor, or health care provider. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Being a teenager is hard. You're under stress to be liked, do well in school, get along with your family, and make big decisions. You can't avoid most of these pressures, and worrying about them is normal. But feeling very sad, hopeless or worthless could be warning signs of a mental health problem. Mental health problems are real, painful, and sometimes severe. You might need help if you have the signs mentioned above, or if you: Often feel very angry or very worried Feel grief for a long time after a loss or death Think your mind is controlled or out of control Use alcohol or drugs Exercise, diet and/or binge-eat obsessively Hurt other people or destroy property Do reckless things that could harm you or others Feel depressed (sad and hopeless) Mental health problems can be treated. To find help, talk to your parents, school counselor, or health care provider.

Metabolism is the process your body uses to make energy from the food you eat. Food is made up of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Your digestive system breaks the food parts down into sugars and acids, your body's fuel. Your body can use this fuel right away, or it can store the energy in your body. If you have a metabolic disorder , something goes wrong with this process. One group of these disorders is amino acid metabolism disorders. They include phenylketonuria (PKU) and maple syrup urine disease. Amino acids are "building blocks" that join together to form proteins. If you have one of these disorders, your body may have trouble breaking down certain amino acids. Or there may be a problem getting the amino acids into your cells. These problems cause a buildup of harmful substances in your body. That can lead to serious, sometimes life-threatening, health problems. These disorders are usually inherited. A baby who is born with one may not have any symptoms right away. Because the disorders can be so serious, early diagnosis and treatment are critical. Newborn babies get screened for many of them, using blood tests. Treatments may include special diets, medicines, and supplements.  Some babies may also need additional treatments if there are complications.

Amyloidosis occurs when abnormal proteins called amyloids build up and form deposits. The deposits can collect in organs such as the kidney and heart. This can cause the organs to become stiff and unable to work the way they should. There are three main types of amyloidosis: Primary - with no known cause Secondary - caused by another disease, including some types of cancer Familial - passed down through genes Symptoms can vary, depending upon which organs are affected. Treatment depends on the type of amyloidosis you have.  The goal is to help with symptoms and limit the production of proteins. If another disease is the cause, it needs to be treated.

What is blood glucose? Blood glucose, or blood sugar, is the main sugar found in your blood. It is your body's primary source of energy. It comes from the food you eat. Your body breaks down most of that food into glucose and releases it into your bloodstream. When your blood glucose goes up, it signals your pancreas to release insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose levels are too high. When you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin, can't use it as well as it should, or both. Too much glucose stays in your blood and doesn't reach your cells. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious health problems (diabetes complications). So if you have diabetes, it's important to keep your blood glucose levels within your target range.What are blood glucose targets? If you have diabetes, your blood glucose target is the range you try to reach as much as possible. The typical targets are: Before a meal: 80 to 130 mg/dL Two hours after the start of a meal: Less than 180 mg/dL Your blood glucose targets may be different, depending on your age, any additional health problems you have, and other factors. Talk with your health care team  about the best target range for you. When and how should I check my blood glucose? If you have diabetes, you'll likely need to check your blood glucose every day to make sure that your blood glucose numbers are in your target range. Some people may need to check their blood glucose several times a day. Ask your health care team how often you need to check it. The most common way to check your blood glucose level at home is with a blood glucose meter. A blood glucose meter measures the amount of glucose in a small sample of blood, usually from your fingertip. Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) is another way to check your glucose levels. Most CGM systems use a tiny sensor that is inserted under your skin. The sensor measures your glucose level every few minutes. It can show changes in your glucose level throughout the day and night. A CGM system is especially useful for people who take insulin and have problems with low blood glucose. Your provider will also check your blood glucose with a blood test called an A1C .  It checks your average blood glucose level over the past three months. People with diabetes usually have an A1C test at least twice a year. But you may need the test more often if you aren't meeting your diabetes treatment goals. What happens if my blood glucose level becomes too high? High blood glucose is called hyperglycemia . Symptoms that your blood glucose levels may be too high include: Feeling thirsty Feeling tired or weak Headaches Urinating (peeing) often Blurred vision If you often have high blood glucose levels or symptoms of high blood glucose, talk with your health care team. You may need a change in your diabetes meal plan , physical activity plan, or diabetes medicines . High blood glucose may also be caused by other conditions that can affect insulin or glucose levels in your blood. These conditions include problems with your pancreas or adrenal glands . What happens if my blood glucose level becomes low for me? Hypoglycemia , also called low blood glucose, happens when your blood glucose level drops below what is healthy for you. For many people with diabetes, this means a blood glucose reading lower than 70 mg/dL. Your number might be different, so check with your health care team to find out what blood glucose level is low for you. Symptoms of low blood glucose tend to come on quickly. The symptoms can be different for everyone, but they may include: Shaking Sweating Nervousness or anxiety Irritability or confusion Dizziness Hunger Low blood glucose levels can be common in people with type 1 diabetes and people with type 2 diabetes who take certain diabetes medicines. If you think you may have low blood glucose, check your level, even if you don't have symptoms. Low blood glucose can be dangerous and should be treated as soon as possible. Although it's rare, you can still get low blood glucose without having diabetes. The causes can include conditions such as liver disease , kidney disease , and hormone deficiencies (lack of certain hormones). Some medicines, such as certain heart medicines and antibiotics , can also cause it. See your provider to find out the cause of your low blood glucose and how to treat it. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Do you know if your current weight is healthy?  "Underweight", "normal", "overweight", and " obese " are all labels for ranges of weight. Obese and overweight mean that your weight is greater than it should be for your health. Underweight means that it is lower than it should be for your health. Your healthy body weight depends on your sex and height. For children, it also depends on your age. A sudden, unexpected change in weight can be a sign of a medical problem.  Causes for sudden weight loss can include: Thyroid problems Cancer Infectious diseases Digestive diseases Certain medicines Sudden weight gain can be due to medicines, thyroid problems, heart failure, and kidney disease. Good nutrition and exercise can help in losing weight . Eating extra calories within a well-balanced diet and treating any underlying medical problems can help to add weight.

Metabolism is the process your body uses to make energy from the food you eat. Food is made up of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Chemicals in your digestive system (enzymes) break the food parts down into sugars and acids, your body's fuel. Your body can use this fuel right away, or it can store the energy in your body tissues. If you have a metabolic disorder , something goes wrong with this process. Carbohydrate metabolism disorders are a group of metabolic disorders. Normally your enzymes break carbohydrates down into glucose (a type of sugar). If you have one of these disorders, you may not have enough enzymes to break down the carbohydrates. Or the enzymes may not work properly. This causes a harmful amount of sugar to build up in your body. That can lead to health problems, some of which can be serious. Some of the disorders are fatal. These disorders are inherited. Newborn babies get screened for many of them, using blood tests. If there is a family history of one of these disorders, parents can get genetic testing to see whether they carry the gene. Other genetic tests can tell whether the fetus has the disorder or carries the gene for the disorder. Treatments may include special diets, supplements, and medicines. Some babies may also need additional treatments, if there are complications. For some disorders, there is no cure, but treatments may help with symptoms.

What is celiac disease? Celiac disease is a chronic (long-term) digestive and immune disorder that damages your small intestine. The damage may prevent your body from absorbing vitamins , minerals , and other nutrients from the food you eat. This can lead to malnutrition and other serious health problems Celiac disease is triggered by eating foods that contain gluten. Gluten is a protein found in wheat, barley, rye, and other grains. It may also be in other products like vitamins and supplements , hair and skin products, toothpastes, and lip balm. Celiac disease is different from gluten sensitivity . Both involve problems with gluten and can cause some of the same symptoms, such as abdominal (belly) pain and fatigue . But gluten sensitivity does not damage the small intestine like celiac disease does. Wheat allergy, a type of food allergy , is also different. With both celiac disease and wheat allergy, your immune system is reacting to wheat. But with wheat allergy, you can have some different symptoms, such as itchy eyes or trouble breathing . And a wheat allergy will not cause long-term damage to the small intestine. What causes celiac disease? The exact cause of celiac disease is not known. Research suggests that celiac disease only happens in people who have certain genes and eat food that contains gluten. Researchers are studying other factors that may play a role in causing the disease. Who is more likely to develop celiac disease? Celiac disease is more common if you: Have a family member who has the disease Have Down syndrome , Turner syndrome , or Williams syndrome Are White Are female What are the symptoms of celiac disease? The symptoms of celiac disease can be different from person to person. Sometimes the symptoms may come and go. Some people may not notice any symptoms. Some of the possible symptoms affect your digestive system. Digestive symptoms are more common in children than in adults. The digestive symptoms include: Bloating (feeling fullness or swelling in your belly) Chronic (long-term) diarrhea or greasy, bulky, unusually bad-smelling stool (poop) Constipation Gas Lactose intolerance because of damage to the small intestine Nausea and vomiting Pain in the abdomen (belly) Weight loss in adults, or not enough weight gain in children Some people with celiac disease have symptoms that affect other parts of the body, such as: Fatigue Depression and anxiety Irritability (in children) Dermatitis herpetiformis, an itchy rash with blisters (mainly in adults) Bone or joint pain Symptoms involving the mouth, such as canker sores or dry mouth What other problems can celiac disease cause? Over time, celiac disease can cause other health problems, especially if it is not treated. These problems can include: Malnutrition Anemia , especially iron-deficiency anemia Bone loss Nervous system problems such as headaches , balance problems , or peripheral neuropathy Reproductive problems, such as missed menstrual periods and miscarriages in women and infertility in men and women How is celiac disease diagnosed? If you have symptoms of celiac disease, your health care provider will look for signs that you might have celiac disease. To do this, your provider will get your medical and family history and do a physical exam. If your provider thinks that you could have celiac disease, you will have some tests. Providers most often use blood tests and biopsies of the small intestine to diagnose celiac disease. The biopsy would be done during an upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy. For this procedure, your provider uses an endoscope (a flexible tube with a camera) to see the lining of your esophagus, stomach, and small intestine. It also allows your provider to take a sample of tissue for a biopsy. What are the treatments for celiac disease? The treatment for celiac disease is following a gluten-free diet for the rest of your life. Sticking with a gluten-free diet will treat or prevent many of the symptoms and other health problems caused by celiac disease. In most cases, it can also heal damage in the small intestine and prevent more damage. Your provider may refer you to a registered dietician (a nutrition expert) who can help you learn how to eat a healthy diet without gluten. You will also need to avoid all hidden sources of gluten, such as certain supplements, cosmetics, toothpaste, etc. Reading product labels can sometimes help you avoid gluten. If a label doesn't tell you what is in a product, check with the company that makes the product for an ingredients list. Don't just assume that a product is gluten-free if it doesn't mention it. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is dehydration? Dehydration is a condition caused by the loss of too much fluid from the body .  It happens when you are losing more fluids than you are taking in, and your body does not have enough fluids to work properly. What causes dehydration? You can become dehydrated because of: Diarrhea Vomiting Sweating too much Urinating too much, which can happen because of certain medicines and illnesses Fever Not drinking enough water or other fluids Who is more likely to develop dehydration? Certain people are more likely to develop dehydration: Older adults. Some people lose their sense of thirst as they age, so they don't drink enough fluids. Infants and young children, who are more likely to have diarrhea or vomiting People with chronic illnesses that cause them to urinate or sweat more often, such as diabetes , cystic fibrosis , or kidney problems People who take medicines that cause them to urinate or sweat more People who exercise or work outdoors during hot weather What are the symptoms of dehydration? In adults , the symptoms of dehydration include: Feeling very thirsty Dry mouth Urinating and sweating less than usual Dark-colored urine Dry skin Feeling tired Dizziness In infants and young children , the symptoms of dehydration include: Dry mouth and tongue Crying without tears No wet diapers for 3 hours or more A high fever Being unusually sleepy or drowsy Irritability Eyes that look sunken Dehydration can be mild, or it can be severe enough to be life-threatening. Get medical help right away if the symptoms also include: Confusion Fainting Lack of urination Rapid heartbeat Rapid breathing Shock How is dehydration diagnosed? To find out if you dehydration, your health care provider will: Do a physical exam Check your vital signs Ask about your symptoms Your provider may also order tests, such as: Blood tests to check your electrolyte levels, especially potassium and sodium . Electrolytes are minerals in your body that have an electric charge. They have many important jobs, including helping to keep a balance of fluids in your body. Blood tests to check your kidney function . Urine tests to check for dehydration and its cause. What are the treatments for dehydration? The treatment for dehydration is to replace the fluids and electrolytes that you have lost. For mild cases, you may just need to drink lots of water. If you lost electrolytes, sports drinks may help. There are also oral rehydration solutions for children. You can buy those without a prescription. Severe cases may be treated with intravenous (IV) fluids with salt in a hospital. Can dehydration be prevented? The key to preventing dehydration is making sure that you get enough fluids: Drink enough water every day. Each person's needs can be different, so ask your health care provider how much you should be drinking each day. Avoid drinks that have sugar and caffeine . Drink extra fluids when the weather is hot, especially if you are exercising or working outside. If you are losing a lot of minerals in sweat, sports drinks can help you. But some sports drinks have lots of sugar, so be careful not to drink too much of them. Get extra fluids when you are sick. If you are having trouble keeping liquids down, you can try taking small sips of water or sucking on ice chips.

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy.  With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin.  With type 2 diabetes , the more common type, your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. You can also have prediabetes .  This means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes.  Having prediabetes puts you at a higher risk of getting type 2 diabetes. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious problems .    It can damage your eyes , kidneys , and nerves . Diabetes can also cause heart disease , stroke and even the need to remove a limb. Pregnant women can also get diabetes, called gestational diabetes . Blood tests can show if you have diabetes. One type of test, the A1C , can also check on how you are managing your diabetes. Exercise, weight control and sticking to your meal plan can help control your diabetes. You should also monitor your blood glucose level and take medicine if prescribed. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is diabetes? If you have diabetes , your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from the foods you eat. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. What health problems can diabetes cause? Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause complications, including: Eye disease , due to changes in fluid levels, swelling in the tissues, and damage to the blood vessels in the eyes Foot problems , caused by damage to the nerves and reduced blood flow to your feet Gum disease and other dental problems, because a high amount of blood sugar in your saliva helps harmful bacteria grow in your mouth. The bacteria combine with food to form a soft, sticky film called plaque. Plaque also comes from eating foods that contain sugars or starches. Some types of plaque cause gum disease and bad breath . Other types cause tooth decay and cavities. Heart disease and stroke , caused by damage to your blood vessels and the nerves that control your heart and blood vessels Kidney disease , due to damage to the blood vessels in your kidneys. Many people with diabetes develop high blood pressure . That can also damage your kidneys. Nerve problems (diabetic neuropathy), caused by damage to the nerves and the small blood vessels that nourish your nerves with oxygen and nutrients Sexual and bladder problems, caused by damage to the nerves and reduced blood flow in the genitals and bladder Skin conditions , some of which are caused by changes in the small blood vessels and reduced circulation. People with diabetes are also more likely to have infections, including skin infections . What other problems can people with diabetes have? If you have diabetes, you need to watch out for blood sugar levels that are very high (hyperglycemia) or very low (hypoglycemia). These can happen quickly and can become dangerous. Some of the causes include having another illness or infection and certain medicines. They can also happen if you don't get the right amount of diabetes medicines . To try to prevent these problems, make sure to take your diabetes medicines correctly, follow your diabetic diet , and check your blood sugar regularly. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Diabetes insipidus (DI) causes frequent urination. You become extremely thirsty, so you drink. Then you urinate. This cycle can keep you from sleeping or even make you wet the bed. Your body produces lots of urine that is almost all water. DI is different from diabetes mellitus (DM), which involves insulin problems and high blood sugar. The symptoms can be similar. However, DI is related to how your kidneys handle fluids. It's much less common than DM. Urine and blood tests can show which one you have. Usually, DI is caused by a problem with your pituitary gland or your kidneys. Treatment depends on the cause of the problem.  Medicines can often help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Gaucher disease is a rare, inherited disorder. It is a type of lipid metabolism disorder . If you have it, you do not have enough of an enzyme called glucocerebrosidase.  This causes too much of a fatty substance to build up in your spleen, liver, lungs, bones and, sometimes, your brain. This prevents these organs from working properly. There are three types: Type 1, the most common form, causes liver and spleen enlargement, bone pain and fractures (broken bones), and, sometimes, lung and kidney problems. It does not affect the brain. It can occur at any age. Type 2, which causes severe brain damage, appears in infants. Most children who have it die by age 2. In type 3, there may be liver and spleen enlargement. The brain is gradually affected. It usually starts in childhood or adolescence. Gaucher disease has no cure. Treatment options for types 1 and 3 include medicine and enzyme replacement therapy, which is usually very effective. There is no good treatment for the brain damage of types 2 and 3. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

A genetic brain disorder is caused by a variation or a mutation in a gene.  A variation is a different form of a gene. A mutation is a change in a gene. Genetic brain disorders affect the development and function of the brain. Some genetic brain disorders are due to random gene mutations or mutations caused by environmental exposure, such as cigarette smoke. Other disorders are inherited, which means that a mutated gene or group of genes is passed down through a family. They can also be due to a combination of both genetic changes and other outside factors. Some examples of genetic brain disorders include: Leukodystrophies Phenylketonuria Tay-Sachs disease Wilson disease Many people with genetic brain disorders fail to produce enough of certain proteins that influence brain development and function. These brain disorders can cause serious problems that affect the nervous system. Some have treatments to control symptoms.  Some are life-threatening.

Hemochromatosis is a disease in which too much iron builds up in your body. Your body needs iron but too much of it is toxic. If you have hemochromatosis, you absorb more iron than you need. Your body has no natural way to get rid of the extra iron. It stores it in body tissues, especially the liver, heart, and pancreas. The extra iron can damage your organs. Without treatment, it can cause your organs to fail. There are two types of hemochromatosis. Primary hemochromatosis is an inherited disease. Secondary hemochromatosis is usually the result of something else, such as anemia, thalassemia, liver disease, or blood transfusions. Many symptoms of hemochromatosis are similar to those of other diseases. Not everyone has symptoms. If you do, you may have joint pain, fatigue, general weakness, weight loss, and stomach pain. Your doctor will diagnose hemochromatosis based on your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and the results from tests and procedures. Treatments include removing blood (and iron) from your body, medicines, and changes in your diet. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is blood glucose? Blood glucose , or blood sugar, is the main sugar found in your blood. It is your body's primary source of energy. It comes from the food you eat. Your body breaks down most of that food into glucose and releases it into your bloodstream. When your blood glucose goes up, it signals your pancreas to release insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. For people with diabetes , your body doesn't make enough insulin, can't use it as well as it should, or both. Too much glucose stays in your blood and doesn't reach your cells. What is hyperglycemia? Hyperglycemia means high blood glucose. It most often affects people who have diabetes. When you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin or can't use it the right way. Too much glucose stays in your blood and doesn't reach your cells. What causes hyperglycemia? A key part of managing diabetes is controlling your blood glucose levels. To do this, you need to follow a diabetes meal plan and get regular physical activity . You might also need to take diabetes medicines. You have to balance all of these to keep your blood glucose at the right levels. But if you eat too much food or the wrong foods, don't take your medicines correctly, or don't get physical activity, you can get hyperglycemia. It can also happen if you are stressed or sick. Less commonly, people who don't have diabetes can also get hyperglycemia. It can be caused by conditions that can affect insulin or glucose levels in your blood. They include problems with your pancreas or adrenal glands , certain medicines, and severe illnesses. What are the symptoms of hyperglycemia? The symptoms of hyperglycemia include: Feeling thirsty Feeling tired or weak Headaches Urinating (peeing) often Blurred vision If you are diabetic and you often have high blood glucose levels or the symptoms of hyperglycemia, talk with your health care team. You may need a change in your diabetes meal plan, physical activity plan, or diabetes medicines. If you don't have diabetes and you are having these symptoms, see your provider to find out the cause and how to treat it. What other problems can hyperglycemia cause? If hyperglycemia is not treated, it can cause other problems. In people with diabetes, long-term hyperglycemia can lead to serious health problems (diabetes complications). If your blood glucose levels get very high, you can develop diabetes-related ketoacidosis (DKA). It happens when your body doesn't have enough insulin to allow blood glucose into your cells for use as energy. Instead, your liver breaks down fat for fuel. This process produces acids called ketones. When too many ketones are produced too fast, they can build up to dangerous levels in your body. This can be life-threatening. The symptoms of DKA may include: Trouble breathing Nausea or vomiting Pain in your abdomen (belly) Confusion Feeling very tired or sleepy If you have an an at-home test for ketones, check your ketone level every 4 to 6 hours when your blood glucose is very high or when you are having these symptoms. If the test shows that your ketones are moderate or high, or if you don't have a ketones test, contact your health care provider right away or get emergency medical help. How is hyperglycemia diagnosed? If you have diabetes, you'll most likely need to check your blood glucose every day and make sure that it's not too high. You can do this with a blood glucose meter or continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) system. There are also blood tests that providers can use to check if your blood glucose is too high. What are the treatments for hyperglycemia? If you have diabetes and often have high blood glucose, your health care team may make changes to your diabetes meal plan, physical activity plan, and/or diabetes medicines. If you have severe hyperglycemia and are having symptoms of DKA, you will need treatment at the hospital. The treatment often includes I.V. (intravenous) fluids and insulin. Can hyperglycemia be prevented? If you have diabetes, managing your diabetes can help prevent hyperglycemia. To manage your diabetes, it's important to: Follow your diabetes meal plan Get regular physical activity If you need diabetes medicines, take them correctly Regularly check your blood glucose level Get regular checkups with your health care team

What is blood glucose? Blood glucose , or blood sugar, is the main sugar found in your blood. It is your body's primary source of energy. It comes from the food you eat. Your body breaks down most of that food into glucose and releases it into your bloodstream. When your blood glucose goes up, it signals your pancreas to release insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. For people with diabetes , your body doesn't make enough insulin, can't use it as well as it should, or both. Too much glucose stays in your blood and doesn't reach your cells. What is hypoglycemia? Hypoglycemia means low glucose. It happens when the level of glucose in your blood drops below what is healthy for you: For many people with diabetes, this means a blood glucose level lower than 70 mg/dL. Your number might be different, so check with your health care team to find out what blood glucose level is too low for you. For people who don't have diabetes, hypoglycemia is typically a blood glucose level lower than 55 mg/dL. What causes hypoglycemia? Hypoglycemia is common in people who have diabetes type 1 or who have diabetes type 2 and take insulin or other diabetes medicines . It can happen: As a side effect of insulin or some other medicines that help your pancreas release insulin into your blood. These medicines can lower your blood glucose level. If you don't eat or drink enough carbohydrates (carbs). Carbs are the main source of glucose for your body. If you get a lot more physical activity than usual. If you drink too much alcohol without enough food. When you are sick and can't eat enough food or keep food down. Although it's rare, you can still get low blood glucose without having diabetes. The causes can include conditions such as liver disease , kidney disease , and hormone deficiencies (lack of certain hormones). It can also happen in people who have had certain types of weight loss surgery . Some medicines, such as certain heart medicines and antibiotics , can also cause it. See your health care provider to find out the cause of your low blood glucose and how to treat it. What are the symptoms of hypoglycemia? The symptoms of low blood glucose tend to come on quickly. The symptoms can be different for everyone, but they may include: Shaking Sweating Nervousness or anxiety Irritability or confusion Dizziness Hunger How is hypoglycemia diagnosed? If you have diabetes, you'll most likely need to check your blood glucose every day and make sure that it's not too low. You can do this with a blood glucose meter or continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) system. There are also blood tests that providers can use to check if your blood glucose is too low. If you don't have diabetes and you have hypoglycemia, your provider will likely order other tests to try to figure out the cause. What are the treatments for hypoglycemia? If you have mild or moderate hypoglycemia, eating or drinking something with carbohydrates can help. But severe hypoglycemia can cause serious complications, including passing out, coma, or even death. Severe hypoglycemia can be treated with glucagon, a hormone that raises blood glucose levels. It can be given as nasal spray or injection. If you have diabetes, your provider can prescribe you a glucagon kit for use in case of an emergency. If you have diabetes and you often have mild or moderate low blood glucose, your health care team may make changes to your diabetes meal plan , physical activity plan, and/or diabetes medicines. If you don't have diabetes and you keep having low blood glucose, the treatment will depend on what is causing it to happen. Can hypoglycemia be prevented? If you have diabetes and you take insulin or other medicines that lower blood glucose, you can help prevent hypoglycemia if you: Follow your diabetes meal plan. Eat and drink enough carbs to keep your blood glucose in your target range. Also carry a source of fast-acting carbohydrate, such as glucose tablets or a juice box, with you in case your blood glucose gets too low. Be safe during physical activity. Check your blood glucose before and afterwards. You may need to eat a snack before your physical activity. If you take diabetes medicines, make sure to take them correctly.

Lactose intolerance means that you cannot digest foods with lactose in them. Lactose is the sugar found in milk and foods made with milk. After eating foods with lactose in them, you may feel sick to your stomach. You may also have: Gas Diarrhea Swelling in your stomach Your doctor may do a blood, breath or stool test to find out if your problems are due to lactose intolerance. Lactose intolerance is not serious.  Eating less food with lactose, or using pills or drops to help you digest lactose usually helps. You may need to take a calcium supplement if you don't get enough of it from your diet, since milk and foods made with milk are the most common source of calcium for most people. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What are leukodystrophies? Leukodystrophies are a group of rare genetic disorders that affect the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS is made up of your brain and spinal cord.  Leukodystrophies damage the white matter of your CNS. The white matter includes: Nerve fibers, also called axons, which connect your nerve cells Myelin, a layer of proteins and fatty materials that covers and protects the nerve fibers. It also helps speed up signals between the nerve cells. When the white matter is damaged, it can slow down or block the signals between nerve cells. This can cause many different symptoms, including trouble with movement , vision , hearing , and thinking. There are over 50 types of leukodystrophies. Some types are present at birth, while others may not cause symptoms until a child becomes a toddler. A few types mainly affect adults. Most types get worse over time. What causes leukodystrophies? Leukodystrophies are caused by genetic changes. These changes are usually inherited, meaning that they are passed from parent to child. What are the symptoms of leukodystrophies? The symptoms of leukodystrophies depend on the type; they can include a gradual loss of: Muscle tone balance and mobility Walking Speech Ability to eat Vision Hearing Behavior There can also be other symptoms, such as: Learning disabilities bladder issues Breathing problems Developmental disabilities Muscle control disorders Seizures How are leukodystrophies diagnosed? Leukodystrophies can be hard to diagnose because there are so many different types which can have different symptoms. Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: Physical and neurological exams A medical history, including asking about family history Imaging tests , such as an MRI or CT scan Genetic testing to look for genetic changes that could cause leukodystrophies Lab tests What are the treatments for leukodystrophies? There is no cure for leukodystrophies. Treatment focuses on relieving symptoms and providing support. It may include: Medicines to manage muscle tone, seizures, and spasticity (muscle stiffness) Physical, occupational, and speech therapies to improve mobility, function, and cognitive problems Nutritional therapy for eating and swallowing problems Educational and recreational programs Stem cell or bone marrow transplantation can be helpful for a few types of leukodystrophy. One type of leukodystrophy, CTX, is treatable if it is diagnosed early. It is treated with chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) replacement therapy. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Metabolism is the process your body uses to make energy from the food you eat. Food is made up of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Chemicals in your digestive system (enzymes) break the food parts down into sugars and acids, your body's fuel. Your body can use this fuel right away, or it can store the energy in your body tissues. If you have a metabolic disorder , something goes wrong with this process. Lipid metabolism disorders, such as Gaucher disease and Tay-Sachs disease , involve lipids. Lipids are fats or fat-like substances. They include oils, fatty acids, waxes, and cholesterol. If you have one of these disorders, you may not have enough enzymes to break down lipids. Or the enzymes may not work properly and your body can't convert the fats into energy. They cause a harmful amount of lipids to build up in your body. Over time, that can damage your cells and tissues, especially in the brain, peripheral nervous system, liver, spleen, and bone marrow. Many of these disorders can be very serious, or sometimes even fatal. These disorders are inherited. Newborn babies get screened for some of them, using blood tests. If there is a family history of one of these disorders, parents can get genetic testing to see whether they carry the gene. Other genetic tests can tell whether the fetus has the disorder or carries the gene for the disorder. Enzyme replacement therapies can help with a few of these disorders. For others, there is no treatment. Medicines, blood transfusions, and other procedures may help with complications.

Metabolism is the process your body uses to get or make energy from the food you eat. Food is made up of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Chemicals in your digestive system break the food parts down into sugars and acids, your body's fuel. Your body can use this fuel right away, or it can store the energy in your body tissues, such as your liver, muscles, and body fat. A metabolic disorder occurs when abnormal chemical reactions in your body disrupt this process. When this happens, you might have too much of some substances or too little of other ones that you need to stay healthy. There are different groups of disorders. Some affect the breakdown of amino acids , carbohydrates , or lipids . Another group, mitochondrial diseases , affects the parts of the cells that produce the energy. You can develop a metabolic disorder when some organs, such as your liver or pancreas, become diseased or do not function normally. Diabetes is an example.

What is metabolic syndrome? Metabolic syndrome is the name for a group of risk factors for heart disease , diabetes , and other health problems. You can have just one risk factor, but people often have several of them together. When you have at least three of them, it is called metabolic syndrome. These risk factors include: A large waistline, also called abdominal obesity or "having an apple shape." Too much fat around the stomach is a greater risk factor for heart disease than too much fat in other parts of the body. Having a high triglyceride level. Triglycerides are a type of fat found in the blood. Having a low HDL cholesterol level . HDL is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol because it helps remove cholesterol from your arteries. Having high blood pressure . If your blood pressure stays high over time, it can damage your heart and lead to other health problems. Having a high fasting blood sugar . Mildly high blood sugar may be an early sign of diabetes. The more factors you have, the higher your risk for heart disease, diabetes, and stroke is. What causes metabolic syndrome? Metabolic syndrome has several causes that act together: Overweight and obesity An inactive lifestyle Insulin resistance, a condition in which the body can't use insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone that helps move blood sugar into your cells to give them energy. Insulin resistance can lead to high blood sugar levels. Age - your risk goes up as get older Genetics - ethnicity and family history People who have metabolic syndrome often also have excessive blood clotting and inflammation throughout the body. Researchers don't know whether these conditions cause metabolic syndrome or worsen it. Who is at risk for metabolic syndrome? The most important risk factors for metabolic syndrome are: Abdominal obesity (a large waistline) An inactive lifestyle Insulin resistance There are certain groups of people who have an increased risk of metabolic syndrome: Some racial and ethnic groups. Mexican Americans have the highest rate of metabolic syndrome, followed by whites and blacks. People who have diabetes People who have a sibling or parent who has diabetes Women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) People who take medicines that cause weight gain or changes in blood pressure, blood cholesterol, and blood sugar levels What are the symptoms of metabolic syndrome? Most of the metabolic risk factors have no obvious signs or symptoms, except for a large waistline. How is metabolic syndrome diagnosed? Your health care provider will diagnose metabolic syndrome based on the results of a physical exam and blood tests. You must have at least three of the risk factors to be diagnosed with metabolic syndrome: A large waistline , which means a waist measurement of 35 inches or more for women 40 inches or more for men A high triglyceride level , which is 150 mg/dL or higher A low HDL cholesterol level , which is Less than 50 mg/dL for women Less than 40 mg/dL for men High blood pressure , which is a reading of 130/85 mmHg or higher. A high fasting blood sugar , which is 100 mg/dL or higher What are the treatments for metabolic syndrome? The most important treatment for metabolic syndrome is a heart-healthy lifestyle, which includes: A heart-healthy eating plan, which limits the amount of saturated and trans fats that you eat. It encourages you to choose a variety of nutritious foods, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean meats. Aiming for a healthy weight Managing stress Getting regular physical activity Quitting smoking (or not starting if you don't already smoke) If making lifestyle changes is not enough, you may need to take medicines. For example, you may need medicines to lower cholesterol or blood pressure. Can metabolic syndrome be prevented? The best way to prevent metabolic syndrome is through the heart-healthy lifestyle changes. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Metabolism is the process your body uses to make energy from the food you eat. Food is made up of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. Chemicals in your digestive system (enzymes) break the food parts down into sugars and acids, your body's fuel. Your body can use this fuel right away, or it can store the energy in your body tissues. If you have a metabolic disorder , something goes wrong with this process. Mitochondrial diseases are a group of metabolic disorders. Mitochondria are small structures that produce energy in almost all of your cells. They make it by combining oxygen with the fuel molecules (sugars and fats) that come from your food. When the mitochondria are defective, the cells do not have enough energy. The unused oxygen and fuel molecules build up in the cells and cause damage. The symptoms of mitochondrial disease can vary. It depends on how many mitochondria are defective, and where they are in the body. Sometimes only one organ, tissue, or cell type is affected. But often the problem affects many of them. Muscle and nerve cells have especially high energy needs, so muscular and neurological problems are common. The diseases range from mild to severe. Some types can be fatal. Genetic mutations cause these diseases. They usually happen before age 20, and some are more common in infants. There are no cures for these diseases, but treatments may help with symptoms and slow down the disease. They may include physical therapy, vitamins and supplements, special diets, and medicines.

Obesity means having too much body fat. It is different from being overweight, which means weighing too much.  The weight may come from muscle, bone, fat, and/or body water.  Both terms mean that a person's weight is greater than what's considered healthy for his or her height. Obesity happens over time when you eat more calories than you use. The balance between calories-in and calories-out differs for each person. Factors that might affect your weight include your genetic makeup, overeating, eating high-fat foods, and not being physically active. Obesity increases your risk of diabetes, heart disease, stroke, arthritis, and some cancers. If you have obesity, losing even 5 to 10% of your weight can delay or prevent some of these diseases. For example, that means losing 10 to 20 pounds if you weigh 200 pounds. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Obesity means having too much body fat. It is different from being overweight, which means weighing too much. Both terms mean that a person's weight is greater than what's considered healthy for his or her height.  Children grow at different rates, so it isn't always easy to know when a child has obesity or is overweight. Ask your health care provider to check whether your child's weight and height are in a healthy range. If a weight-loss program is necessary, involve the whole family in healthy habits so your child doesn't feel singled out.  Encourage healthy eating by: Serving more fruits and vegetables Buying fewer soft drinks and high-fat, high-calorie snack foods Making sure your child eats breakfast every day Eating fast food less often Not using food as a reward Physical activity is also very important. Kids need about 60 minutes each day. It does not have to happen all at once. Several short periods of activity during the day are just as good. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a type of amino acid metabolism disorder . It is inherited. If you have it, your body can't process phenylalanine (Phe). Phe is an amino acid, a building block of proteins. It is in almost all foods. If your Phe level gets too high, it can damage your brain and cause severe intellectual disability.  All babies born in U.S. hospitals must now have a screening test for PKU. This makes it easier to diagnose and treat the problem early. The best treatment for PKU is a diet of low-protein foods. There are special formulas for newborns.  For older children and adults, the diet includes many fruits and vegetables. It also includes some low-protein breads, pastas, and cereals. Nutritional formulas provide the vitamins and minerals you can't get from their food. Babies who get on this special diet soon after they are born develop normally. Many have no symptoms of PKU. It is important to stay on the diet for the rest of your life. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Rickets causes soft, weak bones in children. It usually occurs when they do not get enough vitamin D , which helps growing bones absorb the minerals calcium and phosphorous. It can also happen when calcium or phosphorus levels are too low. Your child might not get enough vitamin D if he or she: Has dark skin Spends too little time outside Has on sunscreen all the time when out of doors Doesn't eat foods containing vitamin D because of lactose intolerance or a strict vegetarian diet Is breastfed without receiving vitamin D supplements Can't make or use vitamin D because of a medical disorder such as celiac disease In addition to dietary rickets, children can get an inherited form of the disease. Symptoms include bone pain or tenderness, impaired growth, and deformities of the bones and teeth. Your child's doctor uses lab and imaging tests to make the diagnosis. Treatment is replacing the calcium, phosphorus, or vitamin D that are lacking in the diet. Rickets is rare in the United States.

Weight loss surgery helps people with extreme obesity to lose weight. It may be an option if you cannot lose weight through diet and exercise or have serious health problems caused by obesity. There are different types of weight loss surgery.  They often limit the amount of food you can take in. Some types of surgery also affect how you digest food and absorb nutrients. All types have risks and complications, such as infections, hernias, and blood clots. Many people who have the surgery lose weight quickly, but regain some weight later on.  If you follow diet and exercise recommendations, you can keep most of the weight off. You will also need medical follow-up for the rest of your life. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Wilson disease is a rare inherited disorder that prevents your body from getting rid of extra copper.  You need a small amount of copper from food to stay healthy. Too much copper is poisonous. Normally, your liver releases extra copper into bile, a digestive fluid.  With Wilson disease, the copper builds up in your liver, and it releases the copper directly into your bloodstream. This can cause damage to your brain, kidneys, and eyes. Wilson disease is present at birth, but symptoms usually start between ages 5 and 35. It first attacks the liver, the central nervous system or both. The most characteristic sign is a rusty brown ring around the cornea of the eye. A physical exam and laboratory tests can diagnose it. Treatment is with drugs to remove the extra copper from your body.  You need to take medicine and follow a low-copper diet for the rest of your life. Don't eat shellfish or liver, as these foods may contain high levels of copper.  At the beginning of treatment, you'll also need to avoid chocolate, mushrooms, and nuts. Have your drinking water checked for copper content and don't take multivitamins that contain copper. With early detection and proper treatment, you can enjoy good health. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Air pollution is a mixture of solid particles and gases in the air. Car emissions, 
chemicals from factories, dust, pollen and mold spores may be suspended as particles. Ozone , a gas, is a major part of air pollution in cities. 
When ozone forms air pollution, it's also called smog. Some air pollutants are poisonous. Inhaling them can increase the chance you'll have 
health problems. People with heart or lung disease, older adults and children are at 
greater risk from air pollution. Air pollution isn't just outside - the air inside buildings can also be polluted and affect your health. Environmental Protection Agency

Arsenic is a natural element found in soil and minerals. Arsenic compounds are used to preserve wood, as pesticides, and in some industries. Arsenic can get into air, water, and the ground from wind-blown dust. It may also get into water from runoff. You may be exposed to arsenic by: Taking in small amounts in food, drinking water , or air Breathing sawdust or burning smoke from arsenic-treated wood Living in an area with high levels of arsenic in rock Working in a job where arsenic is made or used Exposure to arsenic can cause many health problems. Being exposed to low levels for a long time can change the color of your skin. It can cause corns and small warts. Exposure to high levels of arsenic can cause death. Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry

Asbestos is the name of a group of minerals with long, thin fibers. It was once used widely as insulation. It also occurs in the environment. Asbestos fibers are so small you can't see them. If you disturb asbestos, the fibers can float in the air. This makes them easy to inhale, and some may become lodged in the lungs. If you breathe in high levels of asbestos over a long period of time, the fibers can build up in the lungs.  This causes scarring and inflammation, and can affect breathing. Eventually it can lead to diseases such as: Asbestosis, or scarring of the lungs that makes it hard to breathe Mesothelioma , a rare cancer that affects the lining of the lungs or abdomen Lung cancer Lung diseases associated with asbestos usually develop over many years. People who become ill from asbestos are usually exposed on the job over long periods of time. Smoking cigarettes increases the risk. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

A bioterrorism attack is the deliberate release of viruses, bacteria, or other germs to cause illness or death. These germs are often found in nature. But they can sometimes be made more harmful by increasing their ability to cause disease, spread, or resist medical treatment. Biological agents spread through the air, water, or in food. Some can also spread from person to person. They can be very hard to detect. They don't cause illness for several hours or days. Scientists worry that anthrax , botulism , Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever viruses, plague , or smallpox could be used as biological agents. Biodefense uses medical measures to protect people against bioterrorism. This includes medicines and vaccinations. It also includes medical research and preparations to defend against bioterrorist attacks. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Carbon monoxide (CO) is a gas that has no odor or color. But it is very dangerous. It can cause sudden illness and death. CO is found in combustion fumes, such as those made by cars and trucks, lanterns, stoves, gas ranges and heating systems. CO from these fumes can build up in places that don't have a good flow of fresh air.  You can be poisoned by breathing them in.  The most common symptoms of CO poisoning are: Headache Dizziness Weakness Nausea Vomiting Chest pain Confusion It is often hard to tell if someone has CO poisoning, because the symptoms may be like those of other illnesses. People who are sleeping or intoxicated can die from CO poisoning before they have symptoms. A CO detector can warn you if you have high levels of CO in your home. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Climate is the average weather in a place over a period of time.  Climate change is major change in temperature, rainfall, snow, or wind patterns lasting for many years.  It can be caused by natural factors or by human activities.  Today climate changes are occurring at an increasingly rapid rate. Climate change can affect our health.  It can lead to: More heat-related illness and deaths More pollen, mold, and air pollution .  This can cause an increase in allergies, asthma, and breathing problems. Mosquitoes and other insects that carry diseases spreading to areas that used to be too cold for them. More floods and rising sea levels.  This can cause an increase in contamination of food and water. More extreme weather events, such as hurricanes and wildfires .  These can cause death, injuries, stress, and mental health problems. Researchers are studying the best ways to lessen climate change and reduce its impact on our health. NIH: National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences

We all need to drink water. How much you need depends on your size, activity level, and the weather where you live. The water you drink is a combination of surface water and groundwater. Surface water includes rivers, lakes and reservoirs.  Groundwater comes from underground.  The United States has one of the safest water supplies in the world, but drinking water quality can vary from place to place. It depends on the condition of the source water and the treatment it receives. Treatment may include adding fluoride to prevent cavities and chlorine to kill 
germs. Your water supplier must give you annual reports on drinking water. The reports include where your water came from and what contaminants are in it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Electric and magnetic fields (EMFs), also called radiation , are areas of energy that surround electrical devices. Everyday sources of EMFs include: Power lines Electrical wiring Microwave ovens Computers Cell phones Some people worry about EMF exposure and cancer. Some studies have found a link between EMF exposure and a higher risk of childhood leukemia, but other studies have not. Other studies have not found proof that EMF exposure causes other childhood cancers. Studies in adults did not prove that EMF exposure causes cancer. Some people worry that cell (wireless) phones cause cancer or other health problems. The phones do give off radiofrequency energy (RF), a form of electromagnetic radiation.  So far, scientific evidence has not found a link between cell phone use and health problems in humans. However, scientists need to do more research on this before they can say for sure. If you are worried about avoiding any possible risks, you can limit your exposure by: Reducing the amount of time you spend using your cell phone Use speaker mode or a headset to place more distance between your head and the cell phone NIH: National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences

Our environment affects our health. If parts of the environment, like the air , water , 
or soil become polluted, it can lead to health problems. For example, asthma pollutants and chemicals in the air or in the home can trigger asthma attacks. Some environmental risks are a part of the natural world, like radon in the soil. Others are the result of human activities, like lead poisoning from paint, or exposure to asbestos or mercury from mining or industrial use. NIH: National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences

Each year, around 48 million people in the United States get sick from contaminated food. Common causes include bacteria and viruses. Less often, the cause may be a parasite or a harmful chemical, such as a high amount of pesticides. Symptoms of foodborne illness depend on the cause. They can be mild or serious. They usually include: Upset stomach Abdominal cramps Nausea and vomiting Diarrhea Fever Dehydration Most foodborne illnesses are acute. This means that they happen suddenly and last a short time. It takes several steps to get food from the farm or fishery to your dining table. Contamination can happen during any of these steps. For example, it can happen to: Raw meat during slaughter Fruits and vegetables when they are growing or when they are processed Refrigerated foods when they are left on a loading dock in warm weather But it can also happen in your kitchen if you leave food out for more than 2 hours at room temperature. Handling food safely can help prevent foodborne illnesses. Most people with foodborne illness get better on their own. It is important to replace lost fluids and electrolytes to prevent dehydration. If your health care provider can diagnose the specific cause, you may get medicines such as antibiotics to treat it. For more serious illness, you may need treatment at a hospital. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Safe steps in food handling, cooking, and storage can prevent foodborne illness . There are four basic steps to food safety at home: Clean - always wash your fruits and vegetables, hands, counters, and cooking utensils. Separate - keep raw foods to themselves. Germs can spread from one food to another. Cook - foods need to get hot and stay hot. Heat kills germs. Chill - put fresh food in the refrigerator right away. In the grocery store, avoid cans that are bulging or jars that have cracks or loose lids. Check packages to be sure food hasn't reached its expiration date. United States Department of Agriculture

The products you use for cleaning, carpentry, auto repair, gardening, and many other household uses can contain ingredients that can harm you, your family, and the environment. These include : Oven and drain cleaners Cleaning and disinfecting products , including bleach and antibacterial cleaners Laundry powder Floor polish Paint thinners, strippers, and removers Pesticides Grease and rust removers Motor oil and fuel additives Arts and craft supplies Toxic substances in these products can cause harm if inhaled, swallowed, or absorbed through the skin. People respond to toxic substances in different ways. At high doses, a toxic substance might cause birth defects or other serious problems, including brain damage or death. To avoid problems, keep products in the containers they come in and use them exactly as the label says. Follow label directions or get medical help if you swallow or inhale them or get them on your skin. Environmental Protection Agency

We usually think of air pollution as being outdoors, but the air in your house or office could also be polluted. Sources of indoor pollution include: Mold and pollen Tobacco smoke Household products and pesticides Gases such as radon and carbon monoxide Materials used in the building such as asbestos , 
formaldehyde and lead Sometimes a group of people have symptoms that seem to be linked to time spent in a certain building. There may be a specific cause, such as Legionnaire's disease. Sometimes the cause of the illness cannot be found. This is known as sick building syndrome. Usually indoor air quality problems only cause discomfort. Most people feel better as soon as they remove the source of the pollution.  However, some pollutants can cause diseases that show up much later, such as respiratory diseases or cancer. Making sure that your building is well-ventilated and getting rid of pollutants can improve the quality of your indoor air. Environmental Protection Agency

Lead is a metal that occurs naturally in the earth's crust.  Lead can be found in all parts of our environment. Much of it comes from human activities such as mining and manufacturing. Lead used to be in paint; older houses may still have lead paint. You could be exposed to lead by: Eating food or drinking water that contains lead. Water pipes in older homes may contain lead. Working in a job where lead is used Using lead in a hobby, such as making stained glass or lead-glazed pottery Using folk remedies such as herbs or foods that contain lead Breathing air, drinking water, eating food, or swallowing or touching dirt that contains lead can cause many health problems. Lead can affect almost every organ and system in your body. In adults, lead can increase blood pressure and cause infertility, nerve disorders, and muscle and joint pain. It can also make you irritable and affect your ability to concentrate and remember. Lead is especially dangerous for children. A child who swallows large amounts of lead may develop anemia, severe stomachache, muscle weakness, and brain damage. Even at low levels, lead can affect a child's mental and physical growth. Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry

Mercury is an element that is found in air, water and soil. It has several forms. Metallic mercury is a shiny, silver-white, odorless liquid. If heated, it is a colorless, odorless gas. It also combines with other elements to form powders or crystals. Mercury is in many products. Metallic mercury is used in glass thermometers, silver dental fillings, and button batteries. Mercury salts may be used in skin creams and ointments. It's also used in many industries. Mercury in the air settles into water.  It can pass through the food chain and build up in fish, shellfish, and animals that eat fish. The nervous system is sensitive to all forms of mercury. Exposure to high levels can damage the brain and kidneys. Pregnant women can pass the mercury in their bodies to their babies. It is important to protect your family from mercury exposure: Carefully handle and dispose of products that contain mercury Limit your consumption of fish with higher levels of mercury Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

Molds are fungi that can be found both outdoors and indoors. They grow best in warm, damp and humid conditions. If you have damp or wet spots in your house, you will probably get mold. Molds can cause health problems. Inhaling or touching mold or mold spores may cause allergic reactions or asthma attacks in sensitive people. Molds can cause fungal infections . In addition, mold exposure may irritate your eyes, skin, nose, throat, and lungs. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Noise is all around you, from televisions and radios to lawn mowers and washing machines.  Normally, you hear these sounds at safe levels that don't affect hearing. But sounds that are too loud or loud sounds over a long time are harmful.  They can damage sensitive structures of the inner ear and cause noise-induced hearing loss. More than 30 million Americans are exposed to hazardous sound levels on a regular basis.  Hazardous sound levels are louder than 80 decibels. That's not as loud as traffic on a busy street. Listening to loud music, especially on headphones, is a common cause of noise-induced hearing loss.  You can protect your hearing by: Keeping the volume down when listening to music Wearing earplugs when using loud equipment NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Oil spills often happen because of accidents, when people make mistakes or equipment breaks down. Other causes include natural disasters or deliberate acts.  Oil spills have major environmental and economic effects. Oil spills can also affect human health . These effects can depend on what kind of oil was spilled and where (on land, in a river, or in the ocean). Other factors include what kind of exposure and how much exposure there was. People who clean up the spill are more at risk. Problems could include skin and eye irritation, neurologic and breathing problems, and stress. Not much is known about the long-term effects of oil spills.

Ozone is a gas. It can be good or bad, depending on where it is. "Good" ozone occurs naturally about 10 to 30 miles above the Earth's surface. It shields us from the sun's ultraviolet rays. Part of the good ozone layer is gone. Man-made chemicals have destroyed it. Without enough good ozone, people may get too much ultraviolet radiation.  This may increase the risk of skin cancer, cataracts, and immune system problems. "Bad" ozone is at ground level. It forms when pollutants from cars, factories, and other sources react chemically with sunlight. It is the main ingredient in smog . It is usually worst in the summer. Breathing bad ozone can be harmful. It can cause coughing, throat irritation, worsening of asthma , bronchitis, and emphysema . It can lead to permanent lung damage, if you are regularly exposed to it. Environmental Protection Agency

Pests live where they are not wanted or cause harm to crops, people, or animals. Pesticides can help get rid of them. Pesticides are not just insect killers. They also include chemicals to control weeds, rodents, mildew, germs, and more. Many household products contain pesticides. Pesticides can protect your health by killing germs, animals, or plants that could hurt you.  However, they can also be harmful to people or pets. You might want to try non-chemical methods first. If you do need a pesticide, use it correctly. Be especially careful around children and pets. Proper disposal of pesticides is also important - it can help protect the environment. Biologically-based pesticides are becoming more popular. They often are safer than traditional pesticides. Environmental Protection Agency

A poison is any substance that is harmful to your body. You might swallow it, inhale it, inject it, or absorb it through your skin. Any substance can be poisonous if too much is taken. Poisons can include: Prescription or over-the-counter medicines taken in doses that are too high Overdoses of illegal drugs Carbon monoxide from gas appliances Household products , such as laundry powder or furniture polish Pesticides Indoor or outdoor plants Metals such as lead and mercury The effects of poisoning range from short-term illness to brain damage, coma, and death. To prevent poisoning it is important to use and store products exactly as their labels say. Keep dangerous products where children can't get to them. Treatment for poisoning depends on the type of poison. If you suspect someone has been poisoned, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222 right away.

What is radiation? Radiation is energy. It travels in the form of energy waves or high-speed particles. Radiation can occur naturally or be man-made. There are two types: Non-ionizing radiation, which includes radio waves, cell phones, microwaves, infrared radiation and visible light Ionizing radiation, which includes ultraviolet radiation, radon , x-rays , and gamma rays What are the sources of radiation exposure? Background radiation is all around us all the time. Most of it forms naturally from minerals. These radioactive minerals are in the ground, soil, water, and even our bodies. Background radiation can also come from outer space and the sun. Other sources are man-made, such as x-rays, radiation therapy to treat cancer, and electrical power lines. What are the health effects of radiation exposure? Radiation has been around us throughout our evolution. So our bodies are designed to deal with the low levels we're exposed to every day. But too much radiation can damage tissues by changing cell structure and damaging DNA. This can cause serious health problems, including cancer. The amount of damage that exposure to radiation can cause depends on several factors, including: The type of radiation The dose (amount) of radiation How you were exposed, such as through skin contact, swallowing or breathing it in, or having rays pass through your body Where the radiation concentrates in the body and how long it stays there How sensitive your body is to radiation. A fetus is most vulnerable to the effects of radiation. Infants, children, older adults, pregnant women, and people with compromised immune systems are more vulnerable to health effects than healthy adults. Being exposed to a lot of radiation over a short period of time, such as from a radiation emergency , can cause skin burns . It may also lead to acute radiation syndrome (ARS, or "radiation sickness").  The symptoms of ARS include headache and diarrhea. They usually start within hours. Those symptoms will go away and the person will seem healthy for a little while. But then they will get sick again. How soon they get sick again, which symptoms they have, and how sick they get depends on the amount of radiation they received. In some cases, ARS causes death in the following days or weeks. Exposure to low levels of radiation in the environment does not cause immediate health effects. But it can slightly increase your overall risk of cancer. What are the treatments for acute radiation sickness? Before they start treatment, health care professionals need to figure out how much radiation your body absorbed. They will ask about your symptoms, do blood tests, and may use a device that measures radiation. They also try get more information about the exposure, such as what type of radiation it was, how far away you were from the source of the radiation, and how long you were exposed. Treatment focuses on reducing and treating infections, preventing dehydration , and treating injuries and burns. Some people may need treatments that help the bone marrow recover its function. If you were exposed to certain types of radiation, your provider may give you a treatment that limits or removes the contamination that is inside your body. You may also get treatments for your symptoms. How can radiation exposure be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent or reduce radiation exposure: If your health care provider recommends a test that uses radiation, ask about its risks and benefits. In some cases, you may be able to have a different test that does not use radiation. But if you do need a test that uses radiation, do some research into the local imaging facilities. Find one that monitors and uses techniques to reduce the doses they are giving patients. Reduce electromagnetic radiation exposure from your cell phone. At this time, scientific evidence has not found a link between cell phone use and health problems in humans. More research is needed to be sure. But if you still have concerns, you can reduce how much time you spend on your phone. You can also use speaker mode or a headset to place more distance between your head and the cell phone. If you live in a house, test the radon levels, and if you need to, get a radon reduction system. During a radiation emergency, get inside a building to take shelter. Stay inside, with all of the windows and doors shut. Stay tuned to and follow the advice of emergency responders and officials. Environmental Protection Agency

What is radon? Radon is a naturally occurring radioactive gas. It is invisible and has no odor or taste. It comes from the normal decay of uranium and thorium. These are two chemical elements that can be found in soil, rock, and groundwater. Radon breaks down quickly, giving off radioactive particles. Over time, breathing in high levels of these particles can cause lung cancer . How would I be exposed to radon? Outdoors, there are low levels of radon in the air. But radon can also be indoors. It can enter homes and buildings through cracks in the floors, walls, or foundations. Certain building materials can give off radon. And sometimes radon gets inside through well water. Radon levels can be higher in homes and buildings that are well insulated, tightly sealed, and/or built on soil that has a lot of uranium and thorium. Basements and first floors usually have the highest radon levels because they are closer to the ground. How does radon cause lung cancer? When you breathe in radon, its radioactive decay products can get trapped in your lungs. They can damage the cells that line your lungs. Over time, it can lead to lung cancer. It may take years before this happens. Radon is the second leading cause of lung cancer deaths after cigarette smoking . If you smoke and are exposed to radon, your risk of lung cancer is much higher than if you did not smoke. Most radon-related cancer deaths happen in smokers. How do I know if my home has high levels of radon? Testing is the only way to know if there are high levels of radon in your home. You should test your home's radon levels: If it's never been tested or the radon levels are unknown When preparing to buy or sell your house Before and after any renovations, especially after making any repairs to reduce radon levels Before making any lifestyle changes in the home that would cause someone to spend more time in the basement or lower level (such as converting a basement to a bedroom) Testing is fairly inexpensive and easy to do. You can buy a test kit at most hardware stores or hire someone to do a test. It's a good idea to first contact a state or local radon official for advice. They can explain the differences between testing devices and recommend the most appropriate test for your needs. They can also give you a list of qualified radon testers. There are both long- and short-term test kits: Short-term kits measure radon for 2-90 days for quick results Long-term kits measure radon in your home for over 90 days Radon levels can vary from day to day and month to month. So a long-term test will give a better estimate of your average radon level. How can I lower the radon level in my home? If the testing shows that you have an unsafe level of radon in your home, you can have a radon reduction system installed. It can bring the amount of radon down to a safe level. The cost of the system will depend on the size and design of your home. You can also take some other steps to reduce radon levels in your home: Increase air flow in your house by opening windows and using fans and vents to circulate air. But this will only temporarily reduce the radon levels. Seal cracks in floors and walls with plaster, caulk, or other materials designed for this purpose. After any fixes, monitor the radon levels to make sure that they are lower.

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy . If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start. Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides. Use good hygiene , including handwashing. If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures.

Secondhand smoke is a mixture of the smoke that comes from the burning end of a cigarette, cigar, or pipe, and the smoke breathed out by the smoker.  It contains more than 7,000 chemicals. Hundreds of those chemicals are toxic and about 70 can cause cancer. Health effects of secondhand smoke include: Ear infections in children More frequent and severe asthma attacks in children Heart disease and lung cancer in adults who have never smoked There is no safe amount of secondhand smoke. Even low levels of it can be harmful. The only way to fully protect nonsmokers from secondhand smoke is not to allow smoking indoors. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Smallpox is a disease caused by the Variola major virus. Some experts say that over the centuries it has killed more people than all other infectious diseases combined.  Worldwide vaccination stopped the spread of smallpox three decades ago. The last case was reported in 1977. Two research labs still keep small amounts of the virus.  Experts fear bioterrorists could use the virus to spread disease. Smallpox spreads very easily from person to person. Symptoms are flu-like.  They include: High fever Fatigue Headache Backache A rash with flat red sores There is no treatment. Fluids and medicines for pain or fever can help control symptoms. Most people recover, but some can die. Those who do recover may have severe scars. The U.S. stopped routine smallpox vaccinations in 1972. Military and other high-risk groups continue to get the vaccine. The U.S. has increased its supply of the vaccine in recent years.  The vaccine makes some people sick, so doctors save it for those at highest risk of disease.

We all need clean water. People need it to grow crops and to operate factories, and for drinking and recreation.  Fish and wildlife depend on it to survive. Many different pollutants can harm our rivers, streams, lakes, and oceans.  The three most common are soil, nutrients, and bacteria. Rain washes soil into streams and rivers. The soil can kill tiny animals and fish eggs. It can clog the gills of fish and block light, causing plants to die. Nutrients, often from fertilizers, cause problems in lakes, ponds, and reservoirs. Nitrogen and phosphorus make algae grow and can turn water green. Bacteria, often from sewage spills, can pollute fresh or salt water. You can help protect your water supply: Don't pour household products such as cleansers, beauty products, medicines, auto fluids, paint, and lawn care products down the drain. Take them to a hazardous waste collection site. Throw away excess household grease (meat fats, lard, cooking oil, shortening, butter, margarine, etc.) diapers, condoms, and personal hygiene products in the garbage can. Clean up after your pets. Pet waste contains nutrients and germs. Environmental Protection Agency

An induced abortion is a procedure to end a pregnancy. It can be done two different ways: Medication abortion (also called medical abortion) Procedural abortion An induced abortion is different from a spontaneous abortion. That is the loss of a pregnancy before the 20th week of pregnancy. It is more commonly known as a miscarriage . If you are thinking of having an induced abortion, talk with your health care provider. Your provider can explain how the procedures are done, as well as the risks and benefits of each.

Anatomy is the science that studies the structure of the body. On this page, you'll find links to 
descriptions and pictures of the human body's parts and organ systems from head to toe.

What is birth control? Birth control, also known as contraception, is the use of medicines, devices, or surgery to prevent pregnancy. There are many different types. Some are reversible, while others are permanent. Some types can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs). What are the different types of birth control? There are several different types of birth control, and they work in different ways: Barrier methods Male condom A thin sheath that covers the penis to collect sperm and prevent it from entering the woman's body. Condoms that are made of latex and polyurethane can help prevent STIs. Female condom A thin, flexible plastic pouch. Part of the condom is inserted into the vagina before intercourse to prevent sperm from entering the uterus. The uterus, or womb, is the place where the baby grows during pregnancy. Female condoms can also help prevent STIs. Contraceptive sponge A small sponge that you put into the vagina to cover the cervix (the opening of the uterus). The sponge also contains a spermicide to kill sperm. Spermicide A substance that can kill sperm cells. It comes in a foam, jelly, cream, suppository, or film. You put it into the vagina near the uterus. Spermicide can be used alone or with a diaphragm or cervical cap. Diaphragm and cervical cap Cups that are placed inside the vagina to cover the cervix. They may be used with spermicide. They come in different sizes, so it's important to see your health care provider to figure out which size works best for you. Hormonal methods Oral contraceptives ("the pill") Pills that a woman takes every day. They may contain only progestin or both progestin and estrogen. Contraceptive patch A patch that a woman puts on her skin each week. The patch releases hormones into the bloodstream. Vaginal ring A thin, flexible ring. The woman inserts the ring into the vagina, where it continually releases hormones for three weeks. She takes it out for the fourth week. After that week, she puts in a new ring. Injectable birth control An injection of a hormone that a woman gets once every three months. This is done in your provider's office. Implant A single, thin rod that a provider inserts under the skin of a women's upper arm.  It is done in your provider's office. The implant can last for four years. Long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) Intrauterine device (IUD) A small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the uterus. This is done in the provider's office. IUDs can last from 3 to 10 years. There are two types: hormonal IUDs and copper IUDs. Sterilization Tubal ligation A surgery that prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is permanent. Vasectomy A surgery that prevents a man from getting someone pregnant. It is permanent. What are some other forms of pregnancy prevention? There are some types of pregnancy prevention that do not involve medicines, devices, or surgery: Other forms of pregnancy prevention Fertility awareness-based methods They are also called natural rhythm methods. They involve tracking the woman's fertility cycle and avoiding sex or using barrier methods on the days when she is most likely to get pregnant. This method may have higher pregnancy rates than other types. Lactational amenorrhea method (LAM) A form of natural birth control for breastfeeding mothers. It relies on the new mother feeding her baby only breastmilk for up to six months and having no periods or spotting during that time. Withdrawal During intercourse, the penis is pulled out of the vagina before ejaculation. The goal is to keep sperm from entering the vagina . But the sperm can leak out before the penis is pulled out, so this method has higher pregnancy rates than other types. What is emergency contraception? Emergency contraception is not a regular method of birth control. But it can be used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected intercourse or if a condom breaks. There are two types: Copper IUD, which is a small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse. Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs), which are hormonal pills which the woman takes as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse. What else should I know about birth control? When deciding which birth control type is right for you, there are many different factors to consider: Do you want to have children someday? How soon? Do you have any health conditions? How often do you have sex? How many sex partners do you have? Do you also need protection from HIV and other STIs? How well does the birth control method work? Are there any side effects? Will you be able to use it correctly every time? How much does it cost? Your provider can answer your questions about birth control to help you select the best type for you. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is birth weight? Birth weight is the first weight of your baby, taken just after being born.  A low birth weight means that the baby is less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces. A high birth weight means that the baby is more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces. What can cause low birth weight? A baby with a low birth weight can be born too small, too early ( premature ), or both. This can happen for many different reasons. They include: Health problems in the pregnant parent Taking certain medicines during pregnancy Substance use during pregnancy Infections during pregnancy Being pregnant with multiple babies Problems with the placenta, the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to the baby Having small parents Genetic conditions in the baby Birth defects What problems can low birth weight cause? Babies with low birth weight may be more at risk of certain health problems. They include immediate problems, such as: Breathing problems Infections Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) Jaundice Trouble keeping warm There is also a higher risk of longer-term problems, including: Delayed motor and social development Learning disabilities Certain health conditions as an adult, such as heart disease , high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity What can cause high birth weight? Causes of high birth weight can include: Having big parents Diabetes in the pregnant parent Certain genetic conditions Too much weight gain during pregnancy What problems can high birth weight cause? High birth weight can be a concern because it can make delivery of the baby difficult and raise the risk of birth injuries. The baby is at higher risk of problems with: Blood sugar Breathing problems Jaundice Can birth weight problems be prevented? You may be able to prevent some birth weight problems by: Getting regular checkups during pregnancy Getting the right amount of nutrition and calories during pregnancy Controlling your blood sugar if you have diabetes Avoiding substance use during pregnancy

What is a cesarean delivery? A cesarean delivery, also called a cesarean section or c-section, is surgery to deliver a baby. The baby is taken out through your abdomen (belly). In the United States, almost one in three babies are born this way. Some cesarean deliveries are planned. Others are emergency cesarean deliveries, which are done when unexpected problems happen during delivery. When is a cesarean delivery needed? You may need a cesarean delivery because: You have health problems , including infection You are carrying more than one baby Your baby is too big Your baby is in the wrong position Your baby's health is in danger Labor is not moving along as it should There are problems with your placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to your baby) Not everyone who has had a cesarean delivery before will need another one next time. You may be able to have a vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC). Talk to your health care provider about what is right for you. How is a cesarean delivery done? Before the surgery, you will be given pain medicine. Depending on your circumstances, you might get: An epidural block, which numbs the lower part of the body through an injection in the spine. A spinal block, which numbs the lower part of the body through an injection directly into the spinal fluid. General anesthesia, which makes you unconscious during the surgery. This is often used during emergency cesarean deliveries. During the surgery, the surgeon will: Make a cut in your abdomen and uterus. The cut is usually horizontal, but in some cases it may be vertical. Open the amniotic sac and take out your baby. Cut the umbilical cord and the placenta. Close the uterus and abdomen with stitches that will later dissolve. What are the risks of a cesarean delivery? A cesarean delivery is relatively safe for you and your baby. But it is still a major surgery, and it carries risks. They may include: Infection Blood loss Blood clots in the legs, pelvic organs, or lungs Injury to surrounding structures, such as the bowel or bladder A reaction to the medicines or anesthesia used Some of these risks do also apply to a vaginal birth. But it does take longer to recover from a cesarean delivery than from a vaginal birth. And having a cesarean delivery can raise the risk of having difficulties with future pregnancies. The more cesarean deliveries you have, the more the risk goes up. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

When you are ready to have your baby, you'll go through labor.  Labor is the process of giving birth. Signs that you might be going into labor include: Contractions that are regular then start to come closer together Leaking fluid or bleeding from the vagina Low, dull backache Abdominal cramps Call your health care provider if you have any of these signs, even if it is before your due date. Preterm labor can start before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. Labor happens in three stages. The first stage begins with contractions. It continues until your cervix has become thinner and dilated (stretched) to about 4 inches wide. The second stage is the active stage, in which you begin to push downward. Crowning is when your baby's scalp comes into view. Shortly afterward, your baby is born. In the third stage, you deliver the placenta. The placenta is the organ that supplied food and oxygen to your baby during pregnancy. Mothers and babies are monitored closely during labor. Most women are able to have a baby through normal vaginal delivery. If there are complications , the baby may need to be delivered surgically by a Cesarean section . NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Childbirth is the process of giving birth to a baby. It includes labor and delivery. Usually everything goes well, but problems can happen. They may cause a risk to the mother, baby, or both. Some of the more common childbirth problems include: Preterm (premature) labor , when your labor starts before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy Premature rupture of membranes (PROM), when your water breaks too early. If labor does not start soon afterwards, this can raise the risk of infection. Problems with the placenta , such as the placenta covering the cervix, separating from the uterus before birth, or being attached too firmly to the uterus Labor that does not progress , meaning that labor is stalled. This can happen when Your contractions weaken Your cervix does not dilate (open) enough or is taking too long to dilate The baby is not in the right position The baby is too big or your pelvis is too small for the baby to move through the birth canal Abnormal heart rate of the baby. Often, an abnormal heart rate is not a problem. But if the heart rate gets very fast or very slow, it can be a sign that your baby is not getting enough oxygen or that there are other problems. Problems with the umbilical cord , such as the cord getting caught on the baby's arm, leg, or neck. It's also a problem if cord comes out before the baby does. Problems with the position of the baby , such as breech, in which the baby is going to come out feet first Shoulder dystocia , when the baby's head comes out, but the shoulder gets stuck Perinatal asphyxia , which happens when the baby does not get enough oxygen in the uterus, during labor or delivery, or just after birth Perineal tears , tearing of your vagina and the surrounding tissues Excessive bleeding , which can happen when the delivery causes tears to the uterus or if you are not able to deliver the placenta after you give birth to the baby Post-term pregnancy , when your pregnancy lasts more than 42 weeks If you have problems in childbirth, your health care provider may need to give you medicines to induce or speed up labor, use tools to help guide the baby out of the birth canal, or deliver the baby by Cesarean section . NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. When you are pregnant , high blood sugar levels are not good for your baby. About seven out of every 100 pregnant women in the United States get gestational diabetes. Gestational diabetes is diabetes that happens for the first time when a woman is pregnant. Most of the time, it goes away after you have your baby. But it does increase your risk for developing type 2 diabetes later on. Your child is also at risk for obesity and type 2 diabetes. Most women get a test to check for diabetes during their second trimester of pregnancy. Women at higher risk may get a test earlier. If you already have diabetes, the best time to control your blood sugar is before you get pregnant. High blood sugar levels can be harmful to your baby during the first weeks of pregnancy - even before you know you are pregnant. To keep you and your baby healthy, it is important to keep your blood sugar as close to normal as possible before and during pregnancy. Either type of diabetes during pregnancy increases the chances of problems for you and your baby. To help lower the chances talk to your health care team about: A meal plan for your pregnancy A safe exercise plan How often to test your blood sugar Taking your medicine as prescribed. Your medicine plan may need to change during pregnancy. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant. If you have an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg grows in the wrong place, outside the uterus, usually in the fallopian tubes. The result is usually a miscarriage . Ectopic pregnancy can be a medical emergency if it ruptures. Signs of ectopic pregnancy include: Abdominal pain Shoulder pain Vaginal bleeding Feeling dizzy or faint Get medical care right away if you have these signs. Doctors use drugs or surgery to remove the ectopic tissue so it doesn't damage your organs. Many women who have had ectopic pregnancies go on to have healthy pregnancies later. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Infertility means not being able to get pregnant after at least one year of trying (or 6 months if the woman is over age 35). If a woman keeps having miscarriages , it is also called infertility.  Female infertility can result from age, physical problems, hormone problems, and lifestyle or environmental factors. Most cases of infertility in women result from problems with producing eggs. In primary ovarian insufficiency , the ovaries stop functioning before natural menopause.  In polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), the ovaries may not release an egg regularly or they may not release a healthy egg. About a third of the time, infertility is because of a problem with the woman. One third of the time, it is a problem with the man . Sometimes no cause can be found. If you think you might be infertile, see your doctor. There are tests that may tell if you have fertility problems. When it is possible to find the cause, treatments may include medicines, surgery, or assisted reproductive technologies . Happily, many couples treated for infertility are able to have babies. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Alcohol can harm your baby at any stage during a pregnancy. That includes the earliest stages, before you even know you are pregnant. Drinking during pregnancy can cause a group of conditions called fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). Children who are born with FASD can have a mix of problems, such as medical, behavioral, educational, and social problems. The kinds of problems they have depend on which type of FASD they have. The problems could include : Abnormal facial features, such as a smooth ridge between the nose and upper lip Small head size Shorter-than-average height Low body weight Poor coordination Hyperactive behavior Difficulty with attention and memory Learning disabilities and difficulty in school Speech and language delays Intellectual disability or low IQ Poor reasoning and judgment skills Sleep and sucking problems as a baby Vision or hearing problems Problems with the heart, kidneys, or bones Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is the most serious type of FASD. People with fetal alcohol syndrome have facial abnormalities, including wide-set and narrow eyes, growth problems and nervous system abnormalities. Diagnosing FASD can be hard because there is no medical test, like a blood test, for it. The health care provider will make a diagnosis by looking at the child's signs and symptoms and asking whether the mother drank alcohol during pregnancy. FASDs last a lifetime. There is no cure for FASDs, but treatments can help. These include medicines to help with some symptoms, medical care for health problems, behavior and education therapy, and parent training. A good treatment plan is specific to the child's problems. It should include close monitoring, follow-ups, and changes when needed. Certain "protective factors" can help reduce the effects of FASDs and help people who have them reach their full potential. They include: Diagnosis before 6 years of age Loving, nurturing, and stable home environment during the school years Absence of violence around them Involvement in special education and social services There is no known safe amount of alcohol during pregnancy. To prevent FASDs, you should not drink alcohol while you are pregnant, or when you might get pregnant. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

A normal pregnancy lasts nine months. Each three-month period of pregnancy is called a trimester. During each trimester, the fetus grows and develops. Regular medical checkups and prenatal tests are very important. They can: Help keep you and your baby healthy Spot problems with your baby (if there are any). In some cases, health care professionals can treat the problem before your baby is born.  But even when they cannot, it can still be helpful to know about the problem early on. That gives you time to learn about your baby's condition and prepare for any challenges you may face after the baby is born. Prevent problems during delivery . For example, if your baby is breech (bottom first or feet first, instead of head first), you may need to have a Cesarean section to avoid complications. Besides getting medical care, there are other things you can do to keep your baby as healthy as possible. It's important not to drink or smoke .  Try to eat a healthy diet and make sure to take care of any health problems you have during pregnancy .

Genetic counseling provides information and support to people who have, or may be at risk for, genetic disorders . A genetic counselor meets with you to discuss genetic risks. The counseling may be for yourself or a family member. Or you may get it when you are planning or expecting a baby. You may follow up with genetic testing . There are many reasons to seek genetic counseling. You may consider it if you : Have a personal or family history of a genetic condition or birth defect Are pregnant or planning to be pregnant after age 35 Already have a child with a genetic disorder or birth defect Have had two or more pregnancy losses or a baby who died Have had ultrasound or screening tests that suggest a possible problem

What is genetic testing? Genetic testing is a type of medical test that looks for changes in your DNA. DNA is short for deoxyribonucleic acid. It contains the genetic instructions in all living things. Genetic tests analyze your cells or tissue to look for any changes in: Genes , which are parts of DNA that carry the information needed to make a protein Chromosomes , which are thread-like structures in your cells. They contain DNA and proteins. Proteins , which do most of the work in your cells.  Testing can look for changes in the amount and activity level of proteins. If it finds changes, it might be due to changes in your DNA. Why is genetic testing done? Genetic testing may be done for many different reasons, including to: Find genetic diseases in unborn babies. This is one type of prenatal testing . Screen newborn babies for certain treatable conditions Lower the risk of genetic diseases in embryos that were created using assisted reproductive technology Find out if you carry a gene for a certain disease that could be passed on to your children. This is called carrier testing. See whether you are at increased risk of developing a specific disease. This may be done for a disease that runs in your family. Diagnose certain diseases Identify genetic changes that may be causing or contributing to a disease that you were already diagnosed with Figure out how severe a disease is Help guide your doctor in deciding the best medicine and dosage for you. This is called pharmacogenomic testing . How is genetic testing done? Genetic tests are often done on a blood or cheek swab sample. But they may also be done on samples of hair, saliva, skin, amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds a fetus during pregnancy), or other tissue. The sample is sent to a laboratory. There, a lab technician will use one of several different techniques to look for genetic changes. What are the benefits of genetic testing? The benefits of genetic testing include: Helping doctors make recommendations for treatment or monitoring Giving you more information for making decisions about your health and your family's health: If you find out that you are at risk for a certain disease, you might take steps to lower that risk. For example, you may find out that you should be screened for a disease earlier and more often. Or you might decide to make healthy lifestyle changes . If you find out that you are not at risk for a certain disease, then you can skip unnecessary checkups or screenings A test could give you information that helps you make decisions about having children Identifying genetic disorders early in life so treatment can be started as soon as possible What are the drawbacks of genetic testing? The physical risks of the different types of genetic testing are small. But there can be emotional, social, or financial drawbacks: Depending on the results, you may feel angry, depressed, anxious, or guilty. This can be especially true if you are diagnosed with a disease that does not have effective treatments. You may be worried about genetic discrimination in employment or insurance Genetic testing may give you limited information about a genetic disease. For example, it cannot tell you whether you will have symptoms, how severe a disease might be, or whether a disease will get worse over time. Some genetic tests are expensive, and health insurance might only cover part of the cost. Or they may not cover it at all. How do I decide whether to be tested? The decision about whether to have genetic testing is complex. In addition to discussing the test with your health care provider, you can meet with a genetic counselor . Genetic counselors have specialized degrees and experience in genetics and counseling. They can help you understand the tests and weigh the risks and benefits. If you do get a test, they can explain the results and make sure that you have the support that you need.

Every pregnancy has some risk of problems, but there are certain conditions and health issues that can raise that risk, such as: A health condition you had before you got pregnant A health condition you develop during pregnancy A pregnancy with more than one baby A health problem that happened during a previous pregnancy and could happen again Substance use during pregnancy Being over age 35 Any of these can affect your health, the health of your baby , or both. If you have a chronic condition, you should talk to your health care provider about how to minimize your risk before you get pregnant . Once you are pregnant, you may need a health care team to monitor your pregnancy. Some common conditions that can complicate a pregnancy include: High blood pressure Kidney problems Autoimmune diseases Obesity HIV Cancer Infections Other conditions that may make pregnancy risky can develop during pregnancy - for example, gestational diabetes and Rh incompatibility . Good prenatal care can help detect and treat them. Some symptoms, such as nausea , back pain , and fatigue , are common during pregnancy.  Sometimes it is hard to know what is normal. Call your health care provider if something is bothering or worrying you.

What is high blood pressure in pregnancy? Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Your arteries are blood vessels that carry blood from your heart to other parts of your body. High blood pressure , or hypertension, is blood pressure that is higher than normal. Having high blood pressure can put you at risk for other health problems, such as heart disease , heart attack , and stroke . During pregnancy, high blood pressure can cause problems for you and your baby. To keep you and your baby healthy, it's important to get treatment for high blood pressure before, during, and after pregnancy. What are the types of high blood pressure in pregnancy? There are different types of high blood pressure in pregnancy: Gestational hypertension is high blood pressure that you develop while you are pregnant. It starts after you are 20 weeks pregnant. You usually don't have any other symptoms. In many cases, it does not harm you or your baby, and it goes away within 12 weeks after childbirth. But it does raise your risk of high blood pressure in the future. If it becomes severe, it can lead to a preterm birth or your baby having a low birth weight . Some women with gestational hypertension do go on to develop preeclampsia, a more serious type of high blood pressure in pregnancy. Chronic hypertension is high blood pressure that starts before the 20th week of pregnancy or before you became pregnant. Some people may have had it long before becoming pregnant but didn't know it until they got their blood pressure checked at their prenatal visit . Sometimes chronic hypertension can also lead to preeclampsia. Preeclampsia is a sudden increase in blood pressure after the 20th week of pregnancy. It usually happens in the last trimester. Preeclampsia also often includes signs of damage to some of your organs, such as your liver or kidneys. The signs may include protein in the urine (pee) and very high blood pressure. Preeclampsia can be serious or even life-threatening for both you and your baby. If preeclampsia becomes severe enough to affect your brain function and causes seizures or a coma , it is called eclampsia . In rare cases, preeclampsia symptoms may not start until after delivery. This is called postpartum preeclampsia . If this type of preeclampsia becomes more severe and causes a seizure, it is known as postpartum eclampsia . When a person with preeclampsia or eclampsia has damage to the liver and blood cells, it's called HELLP syndrome . It is rare, but very serious. Who is more likely to develop high blood pressure in pregnancy? You are more likely to develop high blood pressure in pregnancy if you: Had chronic high blood pressure or chronic kidney disease before pregnancy Had high blood pressure or preeclampsia in a previous pregnancy Have obesity Are under age 20 or over age 40 Are pregnant with more than one baby Are African American Have a family history of high blood pressure in pregnancy Have certain health conditions, such as diabetes or lupus What are the symptoms of high blood pressure in pregnancy? High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. People usually find out they have high blood pressure when their health care provider measures their blood pressure . Preeclampsia can cause other symptoms, including: Too much protein in your urine (called proteinuria). Swelling ( edema ) in your face and hands. Your feet may also swell, but many women have swollen feet during pregnancy. So swollen feet by themselves may not be a sign of a problem. A headache that does not go away. Vision problems, including blurred vision or seeing spots. Pain in your upper right abdomen (belly). Trouble breathing . Eclampsia can also cause seizures, nausea and/or vomiting , and low urine output. If you go on to develop HELLP syndrome , you may also have bleeding or bruising easily, extreme fatigue , and liver failure. What problems can high blood pressure in pregnancy cause? High blood pressure in pregnancy can lead to complications such as: Placental abruption, where the placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to the baby) separates from the uterus (the place where a baby grows during pregnancy) Poor fetal growth, caused by a lack of nutrients and oxygen Preterm birth Your baby having a low birth weight Damage to your kidneys, liver, brain, and other organ and blood systems A higher risk of heart disease for you How is high blood pressure in pregnancy diagnosed? Your provider will check your blood pressure and urine at each prenatal visit. If your blood pressure reading is high (140/90 or higher), especially after the 20th week of pregnancy, your provider will likely want to order some tests. These may include blood tests and other lab tests, such as a test to look for extra protein in your urine . What are the treatments for high blood pressure in pregnancy? If you have high blood pressure, you and your baby will be closely monitored to lower the chance of complications. You may need to: Check your blood pressure at home. Keep track of how many times you feel the baby kicking each day. Adjust your physical activity. Talk to your provider about what level of physical activity is right for you. Take medicine to control your blood pressure. Talk to your provider about which medicines are safe for your baby. Take aspirin in the second trimester, if you are at risk of preeclampsia and your provider recommends aspirin. Visit your provider more often to monitor your condition and your baby's growth rate and heart rate. If you have eclampsia , HELLP syndrome , or a severe case of preeclampsia , you will most likely need to go to the hospital. Treatment often includes medicines. Your provider may also recommend delivering the baby early. They will make the decision based on: How severe the condition is The possible risks to you and your baby How far along the pregnancy is The goal is to lower the risks to you while giving your baby as much time as possible to mature before delivery. The symptoms of preeclampsia can last after delivery, but they usually go away within 6 weeks.

If you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant, it's important to get tested for HIV as soon as possible. If you find out that do have HIV , you can start treatment right away to protect your health and the health of your baby. If I have HIV, can I pass it on to my baby during pregnancy? If you are pregnant and have HIV, there is a risk of passing HIV to your baby. It can happen in three ways: During pregnancy During childbirth, especially if it is vaginal childbirth During breastfeeding But having HIV doesn't mean that you can't have children. Treatment with a combination of HIV medicines can help prevent passing HIV to your baby and protect your own health. If I have HIV, how can I prevent giving it to my baby? There are several different steps you can take to help prevent passing HIV to your baby: Taking HIV medicines . HIV medicines reduce the amount of HIV in the body (viral load) to a very low level. The goal is to get your viral load so low that a standard lab test can't detect it. This is called having an "undetectable viral load." Having an undetectable viral load is the best thing you can do to stay healthy and prevent your baby from getting HIV. These medicines will also help protect your health. Most HIV medicines are safe to use during pregnancy. They don't usually raise the risk of birth defects . But it is important to talk with your health care provider about the risks and benefits of the different medicines. Together you can decide which medicines are right for you. Then you need to make sure you take your medicines regularly. If needed, having a cesarean delivery . If your viral load is not reduced enough by the medicines, having a cesarean delivery (C-Section) can help prevent passing HIV to your baby. Giving HIV medicines to the baby. Your baby will get HIV medicines as soon as possible after birth. The medicines protect your baby from infection from any HIV that passed from you during childbirth. Which medicine your baby gets depends on several factors, including what your viral load was just before you gave birth. Your baby will need to take medicines for 4 to 6 weeks. He or she will get several HIV tests over the first few months. Not breastfeeding. Breast milk can have HIV in it. In the United States, infant formula is safe and readily available. So the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend that if you have HIV, you should feed your baby formula instead of breastfeeding. What if I want to get pregnant and my partner has HIV? If you are trying to get pregnant, it's important for your partner to also get tested for HIV. If your partner does have HIV and you do not, talk to your provider about taking PrEP . PrEP stands for pre-exposure prophylaxis. This means taking medicines to prevent HIV. The PrEP helps to protect both you and your baby from HIV.

During pregnancy , some common infections like the common cold or a skin infection do not usually cause serious problems. But other infections can be dangerous to you, your baby, or both. Some infections may lead to preterm birth and low birth weight babies . Others can cause serious illness, birth defects , and lifelong disabilities, such as hearing loss or learning problems . Some of the infections that can be dangerous during pregnancy include: Bacterial vaginosis (BV) Group B strep (GBS) Hepatitis Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Toxoplasmosis Urinary tract infections Yeast infections Zika virus To try to prevent infections: Don't eat raw or undercooked meat. Don't share food or drinks with other people. Wash your hands frequently. Don't empty cat litter. Cats can transmit toxoplasmosis. Talk to your health care provider about vaccinations . If you have sex during pregnancy, use a condom every time. If you do get an infection during pregnancy, contact your health care provider about how best to protect you and your baby. Only some medicines are safe during pregnancy .

Infertility means not being able to become pregnant after a year of trying. If a woman can get pregnant but keeps having miscarriages or stillbirths , that's also called infertility. Infertility is fairly common. After one year of having unprotected sex, about 15% of couples are unable to get pregnant. About a third of the time, infertility can be traced to the woman . In another third of cases, it is because of the man . The rest of the time, it is because of both partners or no cause can be found. There are treatments that are specifically for men or for women. Some involve both partners. Drugs, assisted reproductive technology , and surgery are common treatments. Happily, many couples treated for infertility go on to have babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

A miscarriage is an unexpected loss of pregnancy before the 20th week of pregnancy. Most miscarriages happen very early in the pregnancy, often before a woman even knows she is pregnant. Factors that may contribute to miscarriage include: A genetic problem with the fetus Problems with the uterus or cervix Chronic diseases, such as polycystic ovary syndrome Signs of a miscarriage include vaginal spotting, abdominal pain or cramping, and fluid or tissue passing from the vagina. Bleeding can be a symptom of miscarriage, but many women also have it in early pregnancy and don't miscarry. To be sure, contact your health care provider right away if you have bleeding. Women who miscarry early in their pregnancy usually do not need any treatment. In some cases, there is tissue left in the uterus. Doctors use a procedure called a dilatation and curettage (D&C) or medicines to remove the tissue. Counseling may help you cope with your grief. Later, if you do decide to try again, work closely with your health care provider to lower the risks. Many women who have a miscarriage go on to have healthy babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Taking home a new baby is one of the happiest times in a woman's life.  But it also presents both physical and emotional challenges.  : Get as much rest as possible. You may find that all you can do is eat, sleep, and care for your baby. And that is perfectly okay. You will have spotting or bleeding, like a menstrual period, off and on for up to six weeks. You might also have swelling in your legs and feet, feel constipated, have menstrual-like cramping. Even if you are not breastfeeding, you can have milk leaking from your nipples, and your breasts might feel full, tender, or uncomfortable. Follow your doctor's instructions on how much activity, like climbing stairs or walking, you can do for the next few weeks. Doctors usually recommend that you abstain from sexual intercourse for four to six weeks after birth. In addition to physical changes, you may feel sad or have the "baby blues."  If you are extremely sad or are unable to care for yourself or your baby, you might have a serious condition called postpartum depression . Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Many women have the baby blues after childbirth. If you have the baby blues, you may have mood swings, feel sad, anxious or overwhelmed, have crying spells, lose your appetite, or have trouble sleeping. The baby blues most often go away within a few days or a week. The symptoms are not severe and do not need treatment. The symptoms of postpartum depression last longer and are more severe.   You may also feel hopeless and worthless and lose interest in the baby. You may have thoughts of hurting yourself or the baby. Very rarely, new mothers develop something even more serious. They may have hallucinations or try to hurt themselves or the baby. They need to get treatment right away, often in the hospital. Postpartum depression can begin anytime within the first year after childbirth. The cause is unknown. Hormonal and physical changes after birth and the stress of caring for a new baby may play a role. Women who have had depression are at higher risk. If you think you have postpartum depression, tell your health care provider. Medicines, including antidepressants , and talk therapy can help you get well. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

If you are trying to have a baby or are just thinking about it, it is not too early to prepare for a safe pregnancy and a healthy baby. You should see your health care provider for preconception care. Preconception care is care you receive before you get pregnant. Your health care provider can help you figure out which steps you need to take now, such as: Finding and taking care of any problems that might affect you and your baby later, like diabetes or high blood pressure Increasing the amount of folic acid you get to prevent neural tube defects Getting up to date on vaccines Avoiding smoking, drinking alcohol, or taking drugs Trying to reach a healthy weight By taking action on health issues before pregnancy, you can prevent many future problems for yourself and your baby. Once you're pregnant,  you'll get prenatal care until your baby is born. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

You're going to have a baby! It's an exciting time, but it can also feel a bit overwhelming.  You may have a lot of questions, including what you can do to give your baby a healthy start. To keep you and your baby healthy during pregnancy, it is important to: Have regular visits with your health care provider. These prenatal care visits help make sure that you and your baby are healthy. And if there are any health problems, your provider can find them early. Getting treatment right away can cure many problems and prevent others. Eat healthy and drink plenty of water. Good nutrition during pregnancy includes eating a variety of: Fruits Vegetables Whole grains Lean meats or other protein sources Low-fat dairy products Take prenatal vitamins. During pregnancy, you need higher amounts of certain vitamins and minerals, such as folic acid and iron . Be careful with medicines. Always check with your provider before you start or stop any medicine . This includes over-the-counter medicines and dietary or herbal supplements. Stay active. Physical activity can help you stay strong, feel and sleep better, and prepare your body for birth. Check with your provider about which types of activities are right for you. Avoid substances that could hurt your baby , including alcohol, drugs, and tobacco . Your body will keep changing as your baby grows . It can be hard to know whether a new symptom is normal or could be a sign of a problem . Check with your provider if something is bothering or worrying you.

Not all medicines are safe to take when you are pregnant . Some medicines can harm your baby. That includes over-the-counter or prescription drugs, herbs, and supplements. Always speak with your health care provider before you start or stop any medicine. Not using medicine that you need may be more harmful to you and your baby than using the medicine. For example, many pregnant women take prescription medicines for health problems like diabetes, asthma, seizures, and heartburn. The decision about whether or not to take a medicine depends on the risks and benefits.  You and your health care provider should make this choice together. Pregnant women should not take regular vitamins. They may have too much or too little of the vitamins that you need. There are special vitamins for pregnant women.  It is important to take 0.4 mg of folic acid every day before you become pregnant through the first part of your pregnancy. Folic acid helps to prevent birth defects of the baby's brain or spine. Food and Drug Administration

What is nutrition, and why is it important during pregnancy? Nutrition is about eating a healthy and balanced diet so your body gets the nutrients that it needs. Nutrients are substances in foods that our bodies need so they can function and grow. They include carbohydrates , fats , proteins , vitamins , minerals , and water. When you're pregnant , nutrition is more important than ever. You need more of many important nutrients than you did before pregnancy. Making healthy food choices every day will help you give your baby what they need to develop . It will also help make sure that you and your baby gain a healthy amount of weight. Do I have any special nutritional needs now that I am pregnant? You need more folic acid, iron, calcium, and vitamin D than you did before pregnancy: Folic acid is a B vitamin that may help prevent neural tube defects . Before pregnancy, you need 400 mcg (micrograms) per day. During pregnancy and when breastfeeding, you need 600 mcg per day from foods and/or vitamins. It is hard to get this amount from foods alone, so you will most likely need to take a supplement that contains folic acid. Iron is important for your baby's growth and brain development. During pregnancy, the amount of blood in your body increases, so you need more iron for yourself and your growing baby. You should get 27 mg (milligrams) of iron a day. Calcium during pregnancy can reduce your risk of preeclampsia . It's a serious medical condition that causes a sudden increase in your blood pressure. Calcium also builds up your baby's bones and teeth. Pregnant adults should get 1,000 mg (milligrams) of calcium a day Pregnant teenagers (ages 14-18) need 1,300 mg of calcium a day Vitamin D helps the calcium to build your baby's bones and teeth. All women, pregnant or not, should be getting 600 IU (international units) of vitamin D per day. Keep in mind that taking too much of a supplement can be harmful. For example, very high levels of vitamin A can cause birth defects . Only take vitamins and mineral supplements that your health care provider recommends. You also need more protein when you are pregnant. Healthy sources of protein include beans, peas, eggs, lean meats, seafood, and unsalted nuts and seeds. Getting enough fluids is another special nutritional concern during pregnancy. When you are pregnant, your body needs even more water to stay hydrated and support the life inside you. So it's important to drink enough fluids every day. How much weight should I gain during my pregnancy? How much weight you should gain depends on your health and how much you weighed before pregnancy: If you were at a normal weight before pregnancy, you should gain about 25 to 35 pounds If you were underweight before pregnancy, you should gain more If you were overweight or had obesity before you became pregnant, you should gain less Check with your provider to find out how much weight gain during pregnancy is healthy for you. You should gain the weight gradually during your pregnancy, with most of the weight gained in the last trimester. Do I need to eat more calories when I am pregnant? How many calories you need depends on your weight gain goals. Your provider can tell you what your goal should be, based on things like your weight before pregnancy, your age, and how fast you gain weight. The general recommendations are: In the first trimester of pregnancy, you probably do not need extra calories In the second trimester, you usually need about 340 extra calories In the last trimester, you may need around 450 extra calories per day During the final weeks of pregnancy, you may not need extra calories Keep in mind that not all calories are equal. You should eat healthy foods that are packed with nutrients - not "empty calories" such as those found in soft drinks, candies, and desserts. What foods should I avoid during pregnancy? During pregnancy, you should avoid: Alcohol. There is no known amount of alcohol that is safe for a woman to drink during pregnancy . Fish that may have high levels of mercury. Limit white (albacore) tuna to 6 ounces per week. Do not eat tilefish, shark, swordfish, marlin, orange roughy, or king mackerel. Foods that are more likely to contain germs that could cause foodborne illness , including Refrigerated smoked seafood like whitefish, salmon, and mackerel Undercooked meat, poultry, eggs, and seafood Refrigerated meat spreads Store-made salads, such as chicken, egg, or tuna salad Unpasteurized or raw milk Unpasteurized juices or cider Unpasteurized soft cheeses, such as unpasteurized feta, Brie, queso blanco, queso fresco, and blue cheeses Raw sprouts of any kind (including alfalfa, clover, radish, and mung bean) Raw cookie dough Unwashed fruits and vegetables Too much caffeine . Drinking high amounts of caffeine may be harmful for your baby. For most people, it's best to limit caffeine to less than 200 mg per day during pregnancy. But first check with your provider about whether you should have caffeine at all.

You may need to take medicines while you are pregnant . But not all medicines are safe during pregnancy. Many medicines carry risks for you, your baby, or both. Opioids, especially when misused, can cause problems for you and your baby while you are pregnant. What are opioids? Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer. Some providers prescribe them for chronic pain . Prescription opioids used for pain relief are generally safe when taken for a short time and as prescribed by your provider. However, people who take opioids are at risk for opioid use disorder (OUD) and overdose . These risks increase when these medicines are misused. Misuse can include taking your opioid medicines in greater amounts or more often than you are supposed to, using them to get high, or taking someone else's opioids. What are the risks of taking opioids during pregnancy? Taking opioids during pregnancy can cause problems for you and your baby. The possible risks include: Neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) - withdrawal symptoms such as irritability, seizures, vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and poor feeding in newborns Neural tube defects - birth defects of the brain, spine, or spinal cord Congenital heart defects - problems with the structure of the baby's heart Gastroschisis - a birth defect of the baby's abdomen, where the intestines stick outside of the body through a hole beside the belly button Loss of the baby, either miscarriage (before 20 weeks of pregnancy) or stillbirth (after 20 or more weeks) Preterm delivery - a birth before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy Stunted growth, leading to low birthweight Problems with the placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to the baby) If your provider suggests that you take opioids during pregnancy, you should first discuss the risks and benefits. Then if you both decide that you need to take the opioids, you should work together to try to minimize the risks. Some of the ways to do this include: Taking them for the shortest time possible Taking the lowest dose that will help you Carefully following your provider's instructions for taking the medicines Contacting your provider if you have side effects Going to all your follow-up appointments If I am already taking opioids and I become pregnant, what should I do? If you have been taking opioids and you become pregnant, contact your provider. But don't stop taking the opioids on your own. If you suddenly stop taking opioids, it could cause severe health problems for you or your baby. In some cases, stopping suddenly during pregnancy may be more harmful than taking the medicines. Can I breastfeed while taking opioids? If you regularly take opioid medicines, you may be able to breastfeed. It depends on which medicine you are taking. But you should not breastfeed if you have HIV or take illegal drugs . Check with your provider before breastfeeding. What is the treatments for opioid use disorder (OUD) in pregnancy? If you are pregnant and have an opioid use disorder, do not stop taking opioids suddenly. Instead, see your provider so you can get help. The treatment for opioid use disorder (OUD) is called medication for opioid use disorder (MOUD). For MOUD during pregnancy, providers prescribe either buprenorphine or methadone. These medicines can reduce your cravings and help prevent withdrawal. Counseling, including behavioral therapies, can also help you to change your attitudes and behaviors related to drug use and build healthy life skills.

During pregnancy , there are many things you can do to keep yourself and your baby healthy. They include getting regular prenatal care , eating healthy , and staying active. But it's also very important to avoid substances that could be harmful to you and your baby, such as tobacco, alcohol, and drugs. Tobacco Smoking during pregnancy passes nicotine, carbon monoxide , and many other harmful chemicals to your baby. Nicotine is not only a health danger for you, but it can also damage your developing baby's brain and lungs. Carbon monoxide can keep the developing baby from getting enough oxygen. If you smoke while pregnant, it raises the risk of your baby being born too small , too early , or with birth defects . During the first year of life, there is a higher risk of your baby dying from sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). And later in life, your child may be more likely to have health problems, such as asthma and obesity . Other tobacco products, including e-cigarettes , also contain nicotine and are not safe to use during pregnancy. And some of the flavorings used in e-cigarettes may be harmful to developing babies. You will also want to try to avoid secondhand smoke , which has some of the same risks as smoking during pregnancy. Alcohol There is no known amount of alcohol that is safe for you to drink during pregnancy and while trying to get pregnant. All types of alcohol are equally harmful, including all wines and beer. The risks from drinking during pregnancy include problems with the growth of the developing baby and fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD). FASD is a life-long condition that can cause a mix of physical, behavioral, and learning problems. Illegal drugs Using illegal drugs, such as cocaine , methamphetamines , and club drugs , during pregnancy can cause problems for both you and your baby. They may cause low birth weight babies, birth defects, or miscarriage . Your child may be more likely to have learning and developmental disabilities. And if you are injecting the drugs, that puts you at risk for HIV . HIV can be passed along to your baby during pregnancy . Prescription drug misuse Misusing prescription drugs can also be harmful. Misuse can include taking more than your prescribed dose or taking it more often, using it to get high, or taking someone else's medicines. The possible effects of misusing a medicine during pregnancy will depend on which medicine you are misusing. Opioids One type of drug that is a concern during pregnancy is opioids . Opioids include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. Taking opioids during pregnancy can cause problems for you and your baby. The risks include birth defects, preterm birth, the loss of the baby, and neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS). NAS causes withdrawal symptoms in newborn babies. If you have pain and your health care provider suggests that you take prescription opioids during pregnancy, first discuss the risks and benefits with the provider. Then if you both decide that you need to take the opioids, you can work together to try to minimize the risks. Cannabis (marijuana) Cannabis (marijuana) is another drug that could be harmful to your baby. Some research shows that using cannabis during pregnancy is linked to developmental problems in children and teens. More research is needed, but the safest thing to do is stop using it if you are pregnant. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advises that people should not use cannabis while they are pregnant. Getting help If you are pregnant and using any of these substances, contact your provider. Together you and your provider can find the right treatment to help you quit. If you are taking opioids or are addicted to drugs, don't stop taking them suddenly. That can be dangerous to you and the baby. Instead, contact your provider for help with getting off the drugs safely.

Almost 1 of every 10 infants born in the United States are premature, or preemies. A premature birth is when a baby is born before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. A full-term pregnancy is 40 weeks. Important growth and development happen throughout pregnancy - especially in the final months and weeks. Because they are born too early, preemies weigh much less than full-term babies. They may have health problems because their organs did not have enough time to develop. Problems that a baby born too early may have include: Breathing problems Feeding difficulties Cerebral palsy Developmental delay Vision problems Hearing problems Preemies need special medical care in a neonatal intensive care unit, or NICU.  They stay there until their organ systems can work on their own. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Prenatal care is the health care you get while you are pregnant . It includes your checkups and prenatal testing .  
Prenatal care can help keep you and your baby healthy. It lets your health care provider spot health problems early. Early treatment can cure many problems and prevent others. Your doctor or midwife will give you a schedule for your prenatal visits. If you are over 35 years old or your pregnancy is high risk because of health problems like diabetes or high blood pressure , your doctor or midwife will probably want to see you more often. You can also expect to see your health care provider more often as your due date gets closer. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Prenatal testing provides information about your baby's health before he or she is born. Some routine tests during pregnancy also check on your health. At your first prenatal visit , your health care provider will test for a number of things, including problems with your blood, signs of infections , and whether you are immune to rubella (German measles) and chickenpox . Throughout your pregnancy, your health care provider may suggest a number of other tests, too. Some tests are suggested for all women, such as screenings for gestational diabetes , Down syndrome , and HIV . Other tests might be offered based on your: Age Personal or family medical history Ethnic background Results of routine tests There are two types of tests: Screening tests are tests that are done to see if you or your baby might have certain problems. They evaluate risk, but do not diagnose problems. If your screening test result is abnormal, it does not mean that there is a problem. It means that more information is needed. Your health care provider can explain what the test results mean and possible next steps. You may need diagnostic testing. Diagnostic tests show whether or not you or your baby have a certain problem. It is your choice whether or not to get the prenatal tests. You and your health care provider can discuss the risks and benefits of the tests, and what kind of information the tests can give you. Then you can decide which ones are right for you. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI), also known as premature ovarian failure, happens when a woman's ovaries stop working normally before she is 40. Many women naturally experience reduced fertility when they are about 40 years old. They may start getting irregular menstrual periods as they transition to menopause. For women with POI, irregular periods and reduced fertility start before the age of 40. Sometimes it can start as early as the teenage years. POI is different from premature menopause . With premature menopause, your periods stop before age 40. You can no longer get pregnant. The cause can be natural or it can be a disease, surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. With POI, some women still have occasional periods. They may even get pregnant.  In most cases of POI, the cause is unknown. What causes primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? In about 90% of cases, the exact cause of POI is unknown. Research shows that POI is related to problems with the follicles. Follicles are small sacs in your ovaries. Your eggs grow and mature inside them. One type of follicle problem is that you run out of working follicles earlier than normal. Another is that the follicles are not working properly. In most cases, the cause of the follicle problem is unknown. But sometimes the cause may be: Genetic disorders such as Fragile X syndrome and Turner syndrome A low number of follicles Autoimmune diseases, including thyroiditis and Addison disease Chemotherapy or radiation therapy Metabolic disorders Toxins, such as cigarette smoke , chemicals, and pesticides Who is at risk for primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Certain factors can raise a woman's risk of POI: Family history. Women who have a mother or sister with POI are more likely to have it. Genes. Some changes to genes and genetic conditions put women at higher risk for POI. For example, women Fragile X syndrome or Turner syndrome are at higher risk. Certain diseases, such as autoimmune diseases and viral infections Cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy Age. Younger women can get POI, but it becomes more common between the ages of 35-40. What are the symptoms of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? The first sign of POI is usually irregular or missed periods. Later symptoms may be similar to those of natural menopause: Hot flashes Night sweats Irritability Poor concentration Decreased sex drive Pain during sex Vaginal dryness For many women with POI, trouble getting pregnant or infertility is the reason they go to their health care provider. What other problems can primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) cause? Since POI causes you to have lower levels of certain hormones, you are at greater risk for other health conditions, including: Anxiety and depression. Hormonal changes caused by POI can contribute to anxiety or lead to depression . Dry eye syndrome and eye surface disease. Some women with POI have one of these eye conditions. Both can cause discomfort and may lead to blurred vision. If not treated, these conditions can cause permanent eye damage. Heart disease. Lower levels of estrogen can affect the muscles lining the arteries and can increase the buildup of cholesterol in the arteries. These factors increase your risk of atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries). Infertility. Low thyroid function. This problem also is called hypothyroidism . The thyroid is a gland that makes hormones that control your body's metabolism and energy level. Low levels thyroid hormones can affect your metabolism and can cause very low energy, mental sluggishness, and other symptoms. Osteoporosis. The hormone estrogen helps keep bones strong. Without enough estrogen, women with POI often develop osteoporosis . It is a bone disease that causes weak, brittle bones that are more likely to break . How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) diagnosed? To diagnose POI, your health care provider may do: A medical history, including asking whether you have relatives with POI A pregnancy test, to make sure that you are not pregnant A physical exam, to look for signs of other disorders which could be causing your symptoms Blood tests, to check for certain hormone levels. You may also have a blood test to do a chromosome analysis. A chromosome is the part of a cell that contains genetic information. A pelvic ultrasound, to see whether or not the ovaries are enlarged or have multiple follicles How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) treated? Currently, there is no proven treatment to restore normal function to a woman's ovaries.  But there are treatments for some of the symptoms of POI. There are also ways to lower your health risks and treat the conditions that POI can cause: Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). HRT is the most common treatment. It gives your body the estrogen and other hormones that your ovaries are not making. HRT improves sexual health and decreases the risks for heart disease and osteoporosis. You usually take it until about age 50; that's about the age when menopause usually begins. Calcium and vitamin D supplements. Because women with POI are at higher risk for osteoporosis, you should take calcium and vitamin D every day. In vitro fertilization (IVF). If you have POI and you wish to become pregnant, you may consider trying IVF . Regular physical activity and a healthy body weight. Getting regular exercise and controlling your weight can lower your risk for osteoporosis and heart disease. Treatments for associated conditions. If you have a condition that is related to POI, it is important to treat that as well. Treatments may involve medicines and hormones. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy . If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start. Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides. Use good hygiene , including handwashing. If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures.

There are four major blood types: A, B, O, and AB. The types are based on substances on the surface of the blood cells. Another blood type is called Rh. Rh factor is a protein on red blood cells.  Most people are Rh-positive; they have Rh factor.  Rh-negative people don't have it.  Rh factor is inherited through genes. When you're pregnant , blood from your baby can cross into your bloodstream, especially during delivery. If you're Rh-negative and your baby is Rh-positive, your body will react to the baby's blood as a foreign substance.  It will create antibodies (proteins) against the baby's blood. These antibodies usually don't cause problems during a first pregnancy. But Rh incompatibility may cause problems in later pregnancies, if the baby is Rh-positive. This is because the antibodies stay in your body once they have formed.  The antibodies can cross the placenta and attack the baby's red blood cells.  The baby could get Rh disease, a serious condition that can cause a serious type of anemia. Blood tests can tell whether you have Rh factor and whether your body has made antibodies. Injections of a medicine called Rh immune globulin can keep your body from making Rh antibodies. It helps prevent the problems of Rh incompatibility.  If treatment is needed for the baby, it can include supplements to help the body to make red blood cells and blood transfusions . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

If a woman loses a pregnancy after she's past her 20th week, it's called a stillbirth. Stillbirths are due to natural causes. They can happen before delivery or during delivery. Causes include: Problems with the placenta, the organ that transports oxygen and nutrients to the fetus Genetic problems with the fetus Fetal infections Other physical problems in the fetus In at least half of all cases, it is not possible to tell why the baby died. If stillbirth happens before delivery, your health care provider may induce labor or perform a Cesarean section to deliver the fetus.  In some cases, you can wait until you go into labor yourself.  This usually happens within two weeks of stillbirth. Counseling may help you cope with your grief. Later, if you do decide to try again, work closely with your health care provider to lower the risks. Many women who have a stillbirth go on to have healthy babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Most teenage girls don't plan to get pregnant , but many do. Teen pregnancies carry extra health risks to both the mother and the baby. Often, teens don't get prenatal care soon enough, which can lead to problems later on. They have a higher risk for pregnancy-related high blood pressure and its complications. Risks for the baby include premature birth and a low birth weight . If you're a pregnant teen, you can help yourself and your baby by: Getting regular prenatal care Taking your prenatal vitamins for your health and to prevent some birth defects Avoiding smoking, alcohol, and drugs Using a condom, if you are having sex, to prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs) that could hurt your baby. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms.

Tubal ligation (getting your "tubes tied") is a type of surgery. It prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is a permanent form of birth control , and is effective right away. The surgery cuts, ties, or seals the fallopian tubes. This blocks the path between the ovaries and the uterus. The sperm cannot reach the egg to fertilize it, and the egg cannot reach the uterus. You get the surgery in a hospital or outpatient surgical center. It usually takes about 30 minutes. Almost all women go home the same day. They can return to most normal activities within a few days. Tubal ligation can sometimes be reversed. The reversal is major surgery, and does not always work.

Tumors during pregnancy are rare, but they can happen. Tumors can be either benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer. Malignant ones are. The most common cancers in pregnancy are breast cancer, cervical cancer, lymphoma, and melanoma.  Cancer itself rarely harms the baby, and some cancer treatments are safe during pregnancy.  You and your health care provider will work together to find the best treatment.  Your options will depend on how far along the pregnancy is, as well as the type, size, and stage of your cancer. Another type of tumor that women can get is called a gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD). It happens when a fertilized egg doesn't become a fetus.  GTD is not always easy to find.  It is usually benign, but some types can be malignant. The most common type of GTD is a molar pregnancy. In its early stages, it may look like a normal pregnancy. You should see your health care provider if you have vaginal bleeding (not menstrual bleeding). Treatment depends on the type of tumor, whether it has spread to other places, and your overall health.

If you are pregnant with more than one baby, you are far from alone. Multiple births are up in the United States.  More women are having babies after age 30 and more are taking fertility drugs. Both boost the chance of carrying more than one baby. A family history of twins also makes multiples more likely. Years ago, most twins came as a surprise. Now, most women know about a multiple pregnancy early. Women with multiple pregnancies should see their health care providers more often than women who are expecting one baby. Multiple pregnancy babies have a much higher risk of being born prematurely and having a low birth weight .  There is also more of a risk of disabilities. Some women have to go on bed rest to delay labor. Finally, they may deliver by C-section , especially if there are three babies or more. Parenting multiples can be a challenge. Volunteer help and support groups for parents of multiples can help. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

A vasectomy is a type of minor surgery that prevents a man from being able to get a woman pregnant. It is a permanent form of birth control . A vasectomy works by cutting the vas deferens, which are the tubes that carry the sperm out of the testicles. Then the sperm can no longer reach the semen. Semen is the fluid that the penis ejaculates (releases during orgasm). Since there are no sperm, the man cannot get a woman pregnant. The surgery is quick; it usually takes less than 30 minutes. You will probably be able to go home the same day. You may have some discomfort, bruising, and swelling for a few days. In most cases, you will fully recover in less than a week. A vasectomy is one of the most effective forms of birth control. But it takes about three months (or about 20 ejaculations) before it is effective. You will still need to use other birth control until you know that your semen doesn't have any more sperm in it. After two to three months, your health care provider will test your semen to make sure that there are no sperm in it. Having a vasectomy does not affect your sex life. It does not decrease your sex drive. And it will not affect your ability to get an erection or have an orgasm. Vasectomies can sometimes be reversed, but not always. It is done with a procedure to reconnect the vas deferens. Another option if you decide to have children later might be to have sperm taken from your testicles. The sperm could then be used for in vitro fertilization (IVF). However, this may not always work. It's also important to know that both a vasectomy reversal and IVF are expensive. Having a vasectomy does not protect you from sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as HIV .   Using a condom every time you have anal, vaginal, or oral sex is the only way to protect against STIs. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Many Americans drink alcohol at least occasionally. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans say that adults of legal drinking age should either not drink or drink in moderation. Drinking less is better for your health than drinking more. Also, there are some people who should not drink at all. If you are going to drink, it's important to know how alcohol affects you and how much is too much. How does alcohol affect the body? Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant. This means that it is a drug that slows down brain activity. It can change your mood, behavior, and self-control. It can cause problems with memory and thinking clearly. Alcohol can also affect your coordination and physical control. Alcohol also has effects on the other organs in your body. For example, it can raise your blood pressure and heart rate. If you drink too much at once, it could make you throw up. Why are the effects of alcohol different from person to person? Alcohol's effects vary from person to person, depending on a variety of factors, including: How much you drink How often you drink Your age Your sex Your genetics Your overall health Whether or not you have a family history of alcohol problems What is moderate drinking? For most women, moderate drinking is no more than 1 standard drink a day For most men, moderate drinking is no more than 2 standard drinks a day Even though moderate drinking may be safe for many people, there are still risks. Moderate drinking can raise the risk of death from certain cancers and heart diseases. What is a standard drink? In the United States, a standard drink is one that contains about 14 grams of pure alcohol, which is found in: 12 ounces of regular beer (5% alcohol content) 5 ounces of wine (12% alcohol content) 1.5 ounces or a "shot" of distilled spirits or liquor (40% alcohol content) Who should not drink alcohol? Some people should not drink alcohol at all, including those who: Are in recovery from an alcohol use disorder (AUD) Are are unable to control the amount they drink Are under age 21 Are pregnant or trying to become pregnant Are taking medicines that can interact with alcohol Have medical conditions that get can worse if you drink alcohol Are planning on driving Will be operating machinery or doing activities that require skill, coordination, and alertness If you have questions about whether it is safe for you to drink, talk with your health care provider. What is excessive drinking? Excessive drinking includes binge drinking and heavy alcohol use: Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more: For men, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For women, it is usually after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Heavy alcohol use means: For men, having more than 5 drinks on any day or more than 15 drinks per week. For women, having more than 4 drinks on any day or more than 8 drinks per week. Binge drinking raises your risk of injuries, car crashes, and alcohol overdose. It also puts you at risk of becoming violent or being the victim of violence. Heavy alcohol use over a long period of time may cause health problems such as: Alcohol use disorder (AUD) Liver diseases , including cirrhosis and fatty liver disease Heart diseases Increased risk of certain cancers Increased risk of injuries Heavy alcohol use can also cause problems at home, at work, and with friends. But treatment can help. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

What is alcohol use disorder (AUD)? For most adults, moderate alcohol use is probably not harmful. However, about 18 million adult Americans have an alcohol use disorder (AUD).  This means that their drinking causes distress and harm. AUD can range from mild to severe, depending on the symptoms. Severe AUD is sometimes called alcoholism or alcohol dependence. AUD is a disease that causes: Craving - a strong need to drink Loss of control - not being able to stop drinking once you've started Negative emotional state - feeling anxious and irritable when you are not drinking What is binge drinking? Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more. For a man, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For a woman, it is after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Not everyone who binge drinks has an AUD, but they are at higher risk for getting one. What are the dangers of too much alcohol? Too much alcohol is dangerous. Heavy drinking can increase the risk of certain cancers. It may lead to liver diseases , such as fatty liver disease and cirrhosis . It can also cause damage to the brain and other organs. Drinking during pregnancy can harm your baby . Alcohol also increases the risk of death from car crashes, injuries, homicide, and suicide. How do I know if I have an alcohol use disorder (AUD)? You may have an AUD if you can answer yes to two or more of these questions: In the past year, have you: Ended up drinking more or for a longer time than you had planned to? Wanted to cut down or stop drinking, or tried to, but couldn't? Spent a lot of your time drinking or recovering from drinking? Felt a strong need to drink? Found that drinking - or being sick from drinking - often interfered with your family life, job, or school? Kept drinking even though it was causing trouble with your family or friends? Given up or cut back on activities that you enjoyed just so you could drink? Gotten into dangerous situations while drinking or after drinking? Some examples are driving drunk and having unsafe sex. Kept drinking even though it was making you feel depressed or anxious? Or when it was adding to another health problem? Had to drink more and more to feel the effects of the alcohol? Had withdrawal symptoms when the alcohol was wearing off? They include trouble sleeping, shakiness, irritability, anxiety , depression , restlessness, nausea , and sweating . In severe cases, you could have a fever , seizures , or hallucinations. If you have any of these symptoms, your drinking may already be a cause for concern. The more symptoms you have, the more serious the problem is. What should I do if I think that I might have an alcohol use disorder (AUD)? If you think you might have an AUD, see your health care provider for an evaluation. Your provider can help make a treatment plan , prescribe medicines, and if needed, give you treatment referrals. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

What is an alcohol use disorder? An alcohol use disorder (AUD) is drinking that causes distress and harm. It is a medical condition in which you: Drink alcohol compulsively Can't control how much you drink Feel anxious, irritable, and/or stressed when you are not drinking An AUD can range from mild to severe, depending on the symptoms. Severe AUD is sometimes called alcoholism or alcohol dependence. What are the treatments for alcohol use disorder? Most people with an alcohol use disorder can benefit from some form of treatment. Medical treatments include medicines and behavioral therapies. For many people, using both types gives them the best results. People who are getting treatment for AUD may also find it helpful to go to a support group such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). If you have an AUD and a mental illness, it is important to get treatment for both. Some people may need intensive treatment for AUD. They may go to a residential treatment center for rehabilitation (rehab). Treatment there is highly structured. It usually includes several different kinds of behavioral therapies. It may also include medicines for detox (medical treatment for alcohol withdrawal) and/or for treating the AUD. Which medicines can treat alcohol use disorder? Three medicines are approved to treat AUD: Disulfiram causes unpleasant symptoms such as nausea and skin flushing whenever you drink alcohol. Knowing that drinking will cause these unpleasant effects may help you stay away from alcohol. Naltrexone blocks the receptors in your brain that make you feel good when you drink alcohol. It can also reduce your craving for alcohol. This can help you cut back on your drinking. Acamprosate helps you avoid alcohol after you have quit drinking. It works on multiple brain systems to reduce your cravings, especially just after you have quit drinking. Your health care provider can help you figure out if one of these medicines is right for you. They are not addictive, so you don't have to worry about trading one addiction for another. They are not a cure, but they can help you manage AUD. This is just like taking medicines to manage a chronic disease such as asthma or diabetes. Which behavioral therapies can treat alcohol use disorder? Another name for behavioral therapies for AUD is alcohol counseling. It involves working with a health care professional to identify and help change the behaviors that lead to your heavy drinking.: Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) helps you identify the feelings and situations that can lead to heavy drinking. It teaches you coping skills, including how to manage stress and how to change the thoughts that cause you to want to drink. You may get CBT one-on-one with a therapist or in small groups. Motivational enhancement therapy helps you build and strengthen the motivation to change your drinking behavior. It includes about four sessions over a short period of time. The therapy starts with identifying the pros and cons of seeking treatment. Then you and your therapist work on forming a plan for making changes in your drinking. The next sessions focus on building up your confidence and developing the skills you need to be able to stick to the plan. Marital and family counseling includes spouses and other family members. It can help to repair and improve your family relationships. Studies show that strong family support through family therapy may help you to stay away from drinking. Brief interventions are short, one-on-one or small-group counseling sessions. It includes one to four sessions. The counselor gives you information about your drinking pattern and potential risks. The counselor works with you to set goals and provide ideas that may help you make a change. Is treatment for alcohol use disorder effective? For most people, treatment for an AUD is helpful. But overcoming an alcohol use disorder is an ongoing process, and you may relapse (start drinking again). You should look at relapse as a temporary setback, and keep trying. Many people repeatedly try to cut back or quit drinking, have a setback, then try to quit again. Having a relapse does not mean that you cannot recover. If you do relapse, it is important to return to treatment right away, so you can learn more about your relapse triggers and improve your coping skills. This may help you be more successful the next time. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

What are anabolic steroids? Anabolic steroids are synthetic (man-made) versions of testosterone. Testosterone is the main sex hormone in men. It is needed to develop and maintain male sex characteristics, such as facial hair, deep voice, and muscle growth. Women do have some testosterone in their bodies, but in much smaller amounts. What are anabolic steroids used for? Health care providers use anabolic steroids to treat some hormone problems in men, delayed puberty , and muscle loss from some diseases. But some people misuse anabolic steroids. Why do people misuse anabolic steroids? Some bodybuilders and athletes use anabolic steroids to build muscles and improve athletic performance. They may take the steroids orally, inject them into muscles, or apply them to the skin as a gel or cream. These doses may be 10 to 100 times higher than doses used to treat medical conditions. Using them this way, without a prescription from a health care provider, is not legal or safe. What are the health effects of misusing anabolic steroids? Misuse of anabolic steroids, especially over a long period of time, has been linked to many health problems, including: Acne Stunted growth in teens High blood pressure Changes in cholesterol Heart problems , including heart attack Liver disease , including cancer Kidney damage Aggressive behavior In men, it can also cause: Baldness Breast growth Low sperm count/ infertility Shrinking of the testicles In women, it can also cause: Changes in your menstrual cycle (period) Growth of body and facial hair Male-pattern baldness Voice deepening Are anabolic steroids addictive? Even though they don't cause a high, anabolic steroids can be addictive. You can have withdrawal symptoms if you stop using them, including: Fatigue Restlessness Loss of appetite Sleep problems Decreased sex drive Steroid cravings Depression , which can sometimes be serious and even lead to suicide attempts Behavioral therapy and medicines can be helpful in treating anabolic steroid addiction. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What are club drugs? Club drugs are group of psychoactive drugs. They act on the central nervous system and can cause changes in mood, awareness, and behavior. These drugs are most often used by young adults at bars, concerts, nightclubs, and parties. Club drugs, like most drugs, have nicknames that change over time or are different in different areas of the country. What are the different types of club drugs? The most commonly used types of club drugs include: MDMA (Methylenedioxymethamphetamine), also called Ecstasy and Molly GHB (Gamma-hydroxybutyrate), also known as G and Liquid Ecstasy Ketamine, also known as Special K and K Rohypnol, also known as Roofies Methamphetamine , also known as Speed, Ice, and, Meth LSD (Lysergic Acid Diethylamide), also known as Acid Some of these drugs are approved for certain medical uses. Other uses of these drugs are misuse. What are date rape drugs? Date rape drugs are any type of drug or alcohol used to make sexual assault easier. Someone could put one in your drink when you are not looking. Or you may be drinking alcohol or taking a drug, and a person may make it stronger without you knowing. Club drugs are also sometimes used as "date rape" drugs. These drugs are very powerful. They can affect you very quickly, and you might not know that something is wrong. The length of time that the effects last varies. It depends on how much of the drug is in your body and if the drug is mixed with other drugs or alcohol. Alcohol can make the effects of drugs even stronger and can cause serious health problems - even death. Are there steps I can take to protect myself from date rape drugs? To try to avoid date rape drugs,: Never leave your drink unattended Don't accept drinks from other people If drinking from a can or bottle, open your drink yourself Look out for your friends, and ask them to look out for you

What is cocaine? Cocaine is a very addictive drug that is made from leaves of the coca plant found in South America. It is mostly available as an illegal drug that some people use to get high. In rare cases, it is also used as a prescription drug for for anesthesia during certain surgeries. As a street (illegal) drug, cocaine is usually a fine, white, crystal powder. Street dealers sometimes mix it with cornstarch, talcum powder, or flour to make it look like they have more cocaine. That way they can make more money. They may also mix it with other illegal drugs. Another form of the drug is crack cocaine. Crack cocaine has been heated to make it into a rock crystal. How do people use cocaine? People snort cocaine powder through the nose or rub it into their gums. Others dissolve the powder and inject it into the bloodstream. Some people inject a combination of cocaine and heroin , called a "speedball." Crack cocaine is smoked. What are the short-term effects of cocaine? Cocaine is a stimulant that can make people feel like they have more energy and are extra alert. But it can also make people feel restless, irritable, anxious, and paranoid. Large amounts of cocaine can lead to bizarre, unpredictable, and violent behavior. Cocaine's effects appear almost immediately and disappear within a few minutes to an hour. How long the effects last and how intense they are will depend on how the person used it. In some cases, cocaine can cause very serious health problems such as a heart attack , stroke , or coma . What are the long-term effects of cocaine? People who use cocaine over the long term may develop health problems. Which problems they have will depend on how they used the cocaine: Snorting it can lead to a loss of sense of smell , nosebleeds, nasal damage, and trouble swallowing . Smoking it can cause a cough , asthma , trouble breathing , and a higher risk of infections like pneumonia . Injecting it with a needle can lead to skin or soft tissue infections, as well as scarring . It can cause collapsed veins. When a vein collapses, the blood cannot flow through it. Injecting cocaine also puts a person at higher risk of getting diseases such as HIV and hepatitis C . Other long-term effects of cocaine use may include malnutrition and movement disorders , including Parkinson's disease . Repeated use of cocaine can lead to tolerance. This means users need more and more of the drug to have the same effect. At higher doses over time, the body becomes dependent on cocaine. If someone who is dependent on cocaine stops using it, they will have withdrawal symptoms. These symptoms can include: Depression Restlessness Fatigue Increased appetite Bad dreams and insomnia Slowed thinking Repeated use of cocaine can also lead to cocaine use disorder, also called addiction. This is more than physical dependence. It's a chronic (long-lasting) brain disorder. When someone has it, they continue to use cocaine even though it causes problems in their life. Some examples include health problems and not being able to meet responsibilities at work, school, or home. Getting and using cocaine becomes their main purpose in life. Can a person overdose on cocaine? It's possible to overdose on cocaine. This happens when a person uses so much cocaine that it causes a life-threatening reaction or death. Some people use cocaine along with other drugs or alcohol. This can increase the risk of an overdose. A cocaine overdose can cause health problems such as: Stroke Seizures irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) Heart attack There is no specific medicine to treat an overdose. Health care providers will focus on treating the specific health problems caused by the overdose. What are the treatments for cocaine use disorder? The treatments for cocaine use disorder are different types of behavioral therapies. There are no medicines which can treat it. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What is drug use? Drug use , or misuse, includes: Using illegal substances, such as Anabolic steroids Club drugs Cocaine Heroin Inhalants Marijuana Methamphetamines Misusing prescription medicines , including opioids . This means taking the medicines in a different way than the health care provider prescribed. This includes Taking a medicine that was prescribed for someone else Taking a larger dose than you are supposed to Using the medicine in a different way than you are supposed to. For example, instead of swallowing your tablets, you might crush and then snort or inject them. Using the medicine for another purpose, such as getting high Misusing over-the-counter medicines , including using them for another purpose and using them in a different way than you are supposed to. Why are drugs especially dangerous for young people? Young people's brains are growing and developing until they are their mid-20's. This is especially true of the prefrontal cortex, which is used to make decisions. Taking drugs when young can interfere with developmental processes occurring in the brain. It can also affect their decision-making. They may be more likely to do risky things, such as unsafe sex and dangerous driving. The earlier young people start using drugs, the greater their chances of continuing to use them and become addicted later in life.Taking drugs when you are young can contribute to the development of adult health problems, such as heart disease , high blood pressure , and sleep disorders . Which drugs most commonly used by young people? The drugs that are most commonly used by young people are alcohol , tobacco , and marijuana. Recently, more young people have started vaping tobacco and marijuana. There is still a lot we don't know about the dangers of vaping. Some people have unexpectedly gotten very ill or have even died after vaping. Because of this, young people should stay away from vaping. Why do young people take drugs? There are many different reasons why a young person may take drugs, including: To fit in. Young people may do drugs because they want to be accepted by friends or peers who are doing drugs. To feel good. Abused drugs can produce feelings of pleasure. To feel better. Some young people suffer from depression , anxiety , stress -related disorders, and physical pain. They may do drugs to try to get some relief. To do better in academics or sports. Some young people may take stimulants for studying or anabolic steroids to improve their athletic performance. To experiment. Young people often want to try new experiences, especially ones that they think are thrilling or daring. Which young people are at risk for drug use? Different factors may raise a young person's risk for drug use, including: Stressful early life experiences, such child abuse , child sexual abuse , and other forms of trauma Genetics Prenatal exposure to alcohol or other drugs Lack of parental supervision or monitoring Having peers and/or friends who use drugs What are the signs that a young person has a drug problem? Changing friends a lot Spending a lot of time alone Losing interest in favorite things Not taking care of themselves - for example, not taking showers, changing clothes, or brushing their teeth Being really tired and sad Eating more or eating less than usual Being very energetic, talking fast, or saying things that don't make sense Being in a bad mood Quickly changing between feeling bad and feeling good Missing important appointments Having problems at school - missing class, getting bad grades Having problems in personal or family relationships Lying and stealing Memory lapses, poor concentration, lack of coordination, slurred speech, etc. Can drug use in young people be prevented? Drug use and addiction are preventable. Prevention programs involving families, schools, communities, and the media may prevent or reduce drug use and addiction. These programs include education and outreach to help people understand the risks of drug use. You can help prevent your children from using drugs through: Good communication with your children Encouragement, so your children can build confidence and a strong sense of self. It also helps parents promote cooperation and reduce conflict. Teaching your children problem-solving skills Setting limits, to teach your children self-control and responsibility, provide safe boundaries, and show them that you care Supervision, which helps parents recognize developing problems, promote safety, and stay involved Knowing your children's friends NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What are drugs? Drugs are chemical substances that can change how your body and mind work. They include prescription medicines, over-the-counter medicines , alcohol , tobacco , and illegal drugs. What is drug use? Drug use, or misuse, includes: Using illegal substances, such as Anabolic steroids Club drugs Cocaine Heroin Inhalants Marijuana Methamphetamines Misusing prescription medicines , including opioids . This means taking the medicines in a different way than the health care provider prescribed. This includes Taking a medicine that was prescribed for someone else Taking a larger dose than you are supposed to Using the medicine in a different way than you are supposed to. For example, instead of swallowing your tablets, you might crush and then snort or inject them. Using the medicine for another purpose, such as getting high Misusing over-the-counter medicines, including using them for another purpose and using them in a different way than you are supposed to Drug use is dangerous. It can harm your brain and body, sometimes permanently. It can hurt the people around you, including friends, families, kids, and unborn babies . Drug use can also lead to addiction. What is drug addiction? Drug addiction is a chronic brain disease. It causes a person to take drugs repeatedly, despite the harm they cause. Repeated drug use can change the brain and lead to addiction. The brain changes from addiction can be lasting, so drug addiction is considered a "relapsing" disease. This means that people in recovery are at risk for taking drugs again, even after years of not taking them. Does everyone who takes drugs become addicted? Not everyone who uses drugs becomes addicted. Everyone's bodies and brains are different, so their reactions to drugs can also be different. Some people may become addicted quickly, or it may happen over time. Other people never become addicted. Whether or not someone becomes addicted depends on many factors. They include genetic, environmental, and developmental factors. Who is at risk for drug addiction? Various risk factors can make you more likely to become addicted to drugs, including: Your biology. People can react to drugs differently. Some people like the feeling the first time they try a drug and want more. Others hate how it feels and never try it again. Mental health problems. People who have untreated mental health problems , such as depression , anxiety , or attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are more likely to become addicted. This can happen because drug use and mental health problems affect the same parts of the brain. Also, people with these problems may use drugs to try to feel better. Trouble at home. If your home is an unhappy place or was when you were growing up, you might be more likely to have a drug problem. Trouble in school, at work, or with making friends. You might use drugs to get your mind off these problems. Hanging around other people who use drugs. They might encourage you to try drugs. Starting drug use when you're young. When kids use drugs, it affects how their bodies and brains finish growing. This increases your chances of becoming addicted when you're an adult. What are the signs that someone has a drug problem? Signs that someone has a drug problem include: Changing friends a lot Spending a lot of time alone Losing interest in favorite things Not taking care of themselves - for example, not taking showers, changing clothes, or brushing their teeth Being really tired and sad Eating more or eating less than usual Being very energetic, talking fast, or saying things that don't make sense Being in a bad mood Quickly changing between feeling bad and feeling good Sleeping at strange hours Missing important appointments Having problems at work or at school Having problems in personal or family relationships What are the treatments for drug addiction? Treatments for drug addiction include counseling, medicines, or both. Research shows that combining medicines with counseling gives most people the best chance of success. The counseling may be individual, family, and/or group therapy. It can help you: Understand why you got addicted See how drugs changed your behavior Learn how to deal with your problems so you won't go back to using drugs Learn to avoid places, people, and situations where you might be tempted to use drugs Medicines can help with the symptoms of withdrawal. For addiction to certain drugs, there are also medicines that can help you re-establish normal brain function and decrease your cravings. If you have a mental disorder along with an addiction, it is known as a dual diagnosis . It is important to treat both problems. This will increase your chance of success. If you have a severe addiction, you may need hospital-based or residential treatment. Residential treatment programs combine housing and treatment services. Can drug use and addiction be prevented? Drug use and addiction are preventable. Prevention programs involving families, schools, communities, and the media may prevent or reduce drug use and addiction. These programs include education and outreach to help people understand the risks of drug use. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What is dual diagnosis? If you have a dual diagnosis, that means that you have both a mental disorder and a substance use disorder (SUD), either with alcohol or drugs . A dual diagnosis is a type of comorbidity, which is when someone has two disorders at the same time. Another name for this is co-occurring disorders. Mental and substance use disorders often occur together. Many people who develop SUDs are also diagnosed with mental disorders. And the reverse is true; many people with mental disorders will develop an SUD. Having both types of disorders is even more common in teenagers, people with serious mental illness, and people with certain mental disorders. Why do substance use disorders and mental disorders occur together? Although these problems often occur together, this does not mean that one caused the other, even if one appeared first. In fact, it can be hard to figure out which came first. Researchers think that there are three possible reasons as to why they often occur together: Common risk factors can contribute to both mental disorders and SUDs. These factors include: Genetics. Stress . Trauma, especially in childhood. Veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are also at risk for SUDs Mental disorders can contribute to drug use and SUDs. For example, people with mental disorders may use drugs or alcohol to try to feel better temporarily. This is known as self-medication. Also, mental disorders may change the brain to make it more likely that you will become addicted. Substance use and addiction can contribute to the development of a mental disorder. Substance use may change the brain in ways that make you more likely to develop a mental disorder. What are the treatments for dual diagnosis? If you have a dual diagnosis, it is usually better to treat both conditions at the same time rather than separately. You and your health care provider can work on a treatment plan that fits your needs.The plan should take into account your age, which substance(s) you are misusing, and which specific mental disorder(s) you have. The plan may include: Behavioral therapy, such as talk therapy (psychotherapy), long-term residential treatment (which combines housing and treatment services), and therapies to help you stay motivated to stick with your treatment plan. Medicines. There are effective medicines that treat opioid , alcohol , and nicotine addiction. There are also medicines that can lessen the symptoms of many mental disorders. Some medicines may treat more than one disorder. A referral to a support group. Support groups can give you emotional and social support. They are also a place where people can share tips about how to deal with day-to-day challenges. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

E-cigarettes, or electronic cigarettes, are battery-operated smoking devices.  They often look like cigarettes, but work differently.  Using an e-cigarette is called vaping. The user puffs on the mouthpiece of a cartridge. This causes a vaporizer to heat the liquid inside the cartridge. The liquid contains nicotine, flavorings, and other chemicals. The heated liquid turns into the vapor that is inhaled. Some people think that e-cigarettes are safer than cigarettes, and that they can be used to help people quit smoking.  But not much is known about the health risks of using them, or whether they do help people quit smoking.  However we do know about some dangers of e-cigarettes: They contain nicotine, which is addictive They contain other potentially harmful chemicals There is a link between e-cigarette use and tobacco cigarette use in teens The liquid in e-cigarettes can cause nicotine poisoning if someone drinks, sniffs, or touches it NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

Alcohol can harm your baby at any stage during a pregnancy. That includes the earliest stages, before you even know you are pregnant. Drinking during pregnancy can cause a group of conditions called fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). Children who are born with FASD can have a mix of problems, such as medical, behavioral, educational, and social problems. The kinds of problems they have depend on which type of FASD they have. The problems could include : Abnormal facial features, such as a smooth ridge between the nose and upper lip Small head size Shorter-than-average height Low body weight Poor coordination Hyperactive behavior Difficulty with attention and memory Learning disabilities and difficulty in school Speech and language delays Intellectual disability or low IQ Poor reasoning and judgment skills Sleep and sucking problems as a baby Vision or hearing problems Problems with the heart, kidneys, or bones Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is the most serious type of FASD. People with fetal alcohol syndrome have facial abnormalities, including wide-set and narrow eyes, growth problems and nervous system abnormalities. Diagnosing FASD can be hard because there is no medical test, like a blood test, for it. The health care provider will make a diagnosis by looking at the child's signs and symptoms and asking whether the mother drank alcohol during pregnancy. FASDs last a lifetime. There is no cure for FASDs, but treatments can help. These include medicines to help with some symptoms, medical care for health problems, behavior and education therapy, and parent training. A good treatment plan is specific to the child's problems. It should include close monitoring, follow-ups, and changes when needed. Certain "protective factors" can help reduce the effects of FASDs and help people who have them reach their full potential. They include: Diagnosis before 6 years of age Loving, nurturing, and stable home environment during the school years Absence of violence around them Involvement in special education and social services There is no known safe amount of alcohol during pregnancy. To prevent FASDs, you should not drink alcohol while you are pregnant, or when you might get pregnant. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is heroin? Heroin is an illegal, very addictive opioid drug . It's made from morphine, which comes from the seedpod of opium poppy plants. These plants grow in Southeast and Southwest Asia, Mexico, and Colombia. Heroin can be a white or brown powder, or a black sticky substance known as black tar heroin. How do people use heroin? People inject, sniff, snort, or smoke heroin. Some people mix heroin with crack cocaine , which is called "speedballing." All these ways of taking heroin send it to the brain very quickly, which makes it highly addictive. What are the short-term effects of heroin? People who use heroin report feeling a "rush" (a surge of pleasure). And then they may feel other effects, such as a warm flushing of the skin, dry mouth , and a heavy feeling in the arms and legs. They may also have severe itching , nausea, and vomiting . After these first effects, they will usually be drowsy for several hours, and their breathing will slow down. What are the long-term effects of heroin? People who use heroin over the long term may develop many different health problems. These problems could include liver , kidney , and lung disease, mental disorders , and abscesses . People who inject the drug also risk getting infectious diseases such as HIV , hepatitis , and bacterial infections of the skin, bloodstream, and heart ( endocarditis ). They can also get collapsed veins. When a vein collapses, the blood cannot flow through it. Repeated use of heroin can lead to tolerance. This means users need more and more of the drug to have the same effect. At higher doses over time, the body becomes dependent on heroin.  If someone who is dependent on heroin stops using it, they have withdrawal symptoms. These symptoms can include restlessness, muscle and bone pain, diarrhea , vomiting, and cold flashes with goose bumps. Repeated use of heroin often leads to heroin use disorder, sometimes called addiction. This is more than physical dependence. It's a chronic (long-lasting) brain disorder. When someone has it, they continue to use heroin even though it causes problems in their life. Some examples include health problems and not being able to meet responsibilities at work, school, or home. Getting and using heroin becomes their main purpose in life. Can a person overdose on heroin? It's possible to overdose on heroin. This happens when a person uses so much heroin that it causes a life-threatening reaction or death. All heroin users are at risk of an overdose because they never know the actual strength of the drug they are taking or what may have been added to it. And people often use heroin along with other drugs or alcohol. This can increase the risk of an overdose. When people overdose on heroin, their heart rate and breathing slow down. Their breathing may slow do so much that not enough oxygen reaches the brain. This condition is called hypoxia. Hypoxia can lead to a coma , permanent brain damage, or death. How can a heroin overdose be treated? A medicine called naloxone can treat a heroin (or other opioid) overdose if it is given in time. It works by blocking the effects of the opioid on the body. Sometimes more than one dose of the medicine is needed. There are two forms of naloxone that anyone can use without medical training: nasal spray and injectable. People at risk of an overdose are encouraged to carry naloxone with them. They can buy naloxone at a pharmacy. What are the treatments for heroin use disorder? Treatments for heroin use disorder include medicines to treat withdrawal symptoms, medicine to block the effects of opioids, and behavioral treatments. Often, a combination of medicine and behavioral treatment works best. People getting treatment for heroin use disorder should work with their health care providers to come up with a treatment plan that fits their needs. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What are inhalants? Inhalants are substances that people inhale (breathe in) to get high. There are other substances that people might inhale, such as alcohol. But those are not called inhalants, because they can also be used another way. Inhalants are the substances that you can misuse only by inhaling them. Using inhalants to try to get high, even once, can be very harmful to your brain and body. It can even lead to death. What are the types of inhalants? Inhalants are often products that are easily bought and can be found in the home or workplace. They contain dangerous substances that have psychoactive (mind-altering) properties when they are inhaled. There are four main types of inhalants are: Solvents , which are liquids that become gas at room temperature. They include paint thinner, nail polish remover, gasoline, and glue. Aerosol sprays , such as spray paint, deodorant spray, and vegetable oil sprays. Gases , including gas from lighters, whipped cream dispensers, and laughing gas. Nitrites, which  are similar to a prescription medicine for chest pain. They are sometimes called "poppers." They are sold in small bottles and may be labeled as "air freshener," "leather cleaner," or "liquid aroma." They are usually not used to alter someone's mood, but to improve their sexual function. Some of the common slang terms for various inhalants include: Gluey Huff Laughing gas Rush Snappers Whippets/Whippits How do people use inhalants? People who use inhalants breathe in the fumes through their nose or mouth, usually by "sniffing," "snorting," "bagging," or "huffing." It's called different names depending on the substance and equipment used. The high that inhalants produce usually lasts just a few minutes, so people often try to make it last by inhaling them again and again over several hours. Who uses inhalants? Inhalants are mostly used by young kids and teens. They often try inhalants before they try other substances because inhalants are easier to get. What are the signs that someone is using inhalants? Signs that someone is using inhalants include: Chemical odors on breath or clothing Paint or other stains on face, hands, or clothes Hidden empty spray paint or solvent containers and chemical-soaked rags or clothing Red or runny eyes or nose Drunk or disoriented appearance Slurred speech Nausea or loss of appetite Inattentiveness, lack of coordination, irritability, and depression What are the health effects of using inhalants? Most inhalants affect your central nervous system and slow down brain activity. Inhalants can cause both short-term and long-term health effects: Short-term health effects include: Slurred or distorted speech Lack of body control Euphoria (feeling "high") Dizziness Hallucinations (seeing or hearing things that aren't real) Long-term health effects may include: Liver and kidney damage Loss of coordination Spasms in your arms and legs Delayed behavioral development Brain damage Using inhalants, even once, could lead to an overdose. This can cause you to have seizures or your heart to stop. It can also be deadly. Are inhalants addictive? Addiction to inhalants is rare, but it can happen if you use them repeatedly. Stopping them can cause withdrawal symptoms, such as nausea , sweating , trouble sleeping , and mood changes. Behavioral therapy may help people who are addicted to inhalants. Can inhalant misuse be prevented? Kids and teens who use inhalants to get high are more likely to try other drugs and to have a substance use disorder (SUD) later in life. So it's important to try to prevent inhalant abuse. One thing that parents can do is talk to their children about inhalants. They can explain the dangers and give their children tips on how to deal with peer pressure if someone asks them to try inhalants. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What is marijuana? Marijuana is a green, brown, or gray mix of dried, crumbled parts from the marijuana plant.  The plant contains chemicals which act on your brain and can change your mood or consciousness. How do people use marijuana? There are many different ways that people use marijuana, including: Rolling it up and smoking it like a cigarette or cigar Smoking it in a pipe Mixing it in food and eating it Brewing it as a tea Smoking oils from the plant ("dabbing") Using electronic vaporizers ("vaping") What are the effects of marijuana? Marijuana can cause both short-term and long-term effects. Short term: While you are high, you may experience: Altered senses, such as seeing brighter colors Altered sense of time, such as minutes seeming like hours Changes in mood Problems with body movement Trouble with thinking, problem-solving, and memory Increased appetite Long term: In the long term, marijuana can cause health problems, such as: Problems with brain development. People who started using marijuana as teenagers may have trouble with thinking, memory, and learning. Coughing and breathing problems, if you smoke marijuana frequently Problems with child development during and after pregnancy, if a woman smokes marijuana while pregnant Can you overdose on marijuana? It is possible to overdose on marijuana, if you take a very high dose. Symptoms of an overdose include anxiety , panic, and a rapid heartbeat. In rare cases, an overdose can cause paranoia and hallucinations. There are no reports of people dying from using just marijuana. Is marijuana addictive? After using marijuana for a while, it is possible to get addicted to it. You are more likely to become addicted if you use marijuana every day or you started using it when you were a teenager. If you are addicted, you will have a strong need to take the drug. You may also need to smoke more and more of it to get the same high. When you try to quit, you may have mild withdrawal symptoms such as: Irritability Trouble sleeping Decreased appetite Anxiety Cravings What is medical marijuana? The marijuana plant has chemicals that can help with some health problems. More states are making it legal to use the plant as medicine for certain medical conditions. But there isn't enough research to show that the whole plant works to treat or cure these conditions. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved the marijuana plant as a medicine. Marijuana is still illegal at the national level. However, there have been scientific studies of cannabinoids, the chemicals in marijuana. The two main cannabinoids that are of medical interest are THC and CBD. The FDA has approved two drugs that contain THC. These drugs treat nausea caused by chemotherapy and increase appetite in patients who have severe weight loss from AIDS . There is also a liquid drug that contains CBD. It treats two forms of severe childhood epilepsy . Scientists are doing more research with marijuana and its ingredients to treat many diseases and conditions. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

Methamphetamine - meth for short - is a very addictive stimulant drug.  It is a powder that can be made into a pill or a shiny rock (called a crystal). The powder can be eaten or snorted up the nose. It can also be mixed with liquid and injected into your body with a needle. Crystal meth is smoked in a small glass pipe. Meth at first causes a rush of good feelings, but then users feel edgy, overly excited, angry, or afraid.  Meth use can quickly lead to addiction. It causes medical problems including: Making your body temperature so high that you pass out Severe itching "Meth mouth" - broken teeth and dry mouth Thinking and emotional problems NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What are opioids? Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer. Some providers prescribe them for chronic pain . Prescription opioids used for pain relief are generally safe when taken for a short time and as prescribed by your provider. However, people who take opioids are at risk for opioid use disorder (OUD) and overdose . These risks increase when these medicines are misused. Misuse can include taking more than your prescribed dose or taking it more often, using it to get high, or taking someone else's opioids. What is an opioid overdose? Opioids affect the part of the brain that regulates breathing. When people take high doses of opioids, it can lead to an overdose, with the slowing or stopping of breathing and sometimes death. What causes an opioid overdose? An opioid overdose can happen for a variety of reasons, including if you: Take an opioid to get high. Take an extra dose of a prescription opioid or take it too often (either accidentally or on purpose). Mix an opioid with other medicines, illegal drugs, or alcohol. An overdose can be fatal when mixing an opioid and certain anxiety treatment medicines, such as Xanax or Valium. Take an opioid medicine that was prescribed for someone else. Children are especially at risk of an accidental overdose if they take medicine not intended for them. There is also a risk of overdose if you are getting medications for opioid use disorder (MOUD). MOUD is a treatment for OUD . Many of the medicines used for MOUD are also controlled substances that can be misused. Who is at risk of an opioid overdose? Anyone who takes an opioid can be at risk of an overdose, but you are at higher risk if you: Take illegal opioids Take more opioid medicine than you are prescribed Combine opioids with other medicines and/or alcohol Have certain medical conditions, such as sleep apnea , or reduced kidney or liver function Are over 65 years old What are the signs of an opioid overdose? The signs of an opioid overdose include: Very small pupils of the eyes Falling asleep or loss of consciousness Slow, shallow breathing Choking or gurgling sounds Vomiting Limp body Pale, blue, or cold skin Faint heartbeat Purple lips and fingernails What should I do if I think that someone is having an opioid overdose? If you think someone is having an opioid overdose: Call 911 immediately . Give the person naloxone, if it is available. Naloxone is a safe medication that can quickly stop an opioid overdose. There are two forms. One is a nasal spray that you spray info the nose. The other type is injected into the muscle under the skin, or into the veins. Naloxone  works by blocking the effects of the opioids on the body. It's important to read the product instructions and check the expiration date before you give it to someone. Try to keep the person awake and breathing. Lay the person on their side to prevent choking. Stay with the person until emergency workers arrive. Naloxone won't harm someone if they're overdosing on drugs other than opioids, so it's best to use it if you think someone is overdosing. Can an opioid overdose be prevented? If you are taking opioid pain medicine, there are steps you can take to help prevent an opioid overdose: Take your medicine exactly as prescribed by your provider. Do not take more medicine at once or take medicine more often than you are supposed to. Never mix the pain medicines with alcohol, sleeping pills, or illegal substances. Store your medicine safely where children or pets can't reach it. Consider using a medicine lockbox. Besides keeping children safe, it also prevents someone who lives with you or visits your house from stealing your medicines. Dispose of unused medicine promptly. It is also important to teach your family and friends how to respond to an overdose. If you are at higher risk of an overdose, you will want get naloxone and carry it with you wherever you go. You can buy naloxone at a pharmacy.

What are opioids? Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. Some opioids are made from the opium plant, and others are synthetic (man-made). A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer.  Some providers prescribe them for chronic pain . What are the side effects and risks of opioids? Opioids can cause side effects such as drowsiness, mental fog, nausea, and constipation. They may also cause slowed breathing, which can lead to overdose deaths. If someone has signs of an overdose , call 911. These signs may include: Very small pupils of the eyes Falling asleep or loss of consciousness Slow, shallow breathing Choking or gurgling sounds Vomiting Limp body Pale, blue, or cold skin Faint heartbeat Purple lips and fingernails When using opioids, there is also a risk of opioid use disorder (OUD). What is opioid use disorder (OUD)? Opioid use disorder (OUD) means that you have a problematic pattern of using opioids. The pattern causes a lot of distress and impairment (meaning that it causes problems in and interferes with your daily life). Instead of OUD, sometimes people use the terms "opioid dependence" and "opioid addiction."  Dependence means feeling withdrawal symptoms when not taking the drug. Addiction is a chronic brain disease that causes a person to compulsively seek out drugs, even though they cause harm. The risk of OUD is higher if you misuse the medicines . Misuse can include taking more than your prescribed dose or taking it more often, using it to get high, or taking someone else's opioids. Opioid use disorder and overdoses are serious public health problems in the United States. As more people misuse opioids, more women are misusing opioids during pregnancy . This can lead to health risks for the mother and baby. The baby may be born with neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS).  NAS is a group of withdrawal symptoms that a baby has after being exposed to drugs during pregnancy. Another problem with increased opioid misuse is that it can also lead to more heroin use. There are some people who switch from prescription opioids to heroin because heroin may be cheaper and easier to get. How are opioid use disorder (OUD) and opioid overdose treated? There are effective medicines to treat OUD . Using medicines to treat OUD is called medications for opioid use disorder (MOUD). MOUD can help you stop using the drug, get through withdrawal, and cope with cravings. It is often combined with behavioral therapy and counseling.  Having support from family and friends can also help. There is also a medicine called naloxone which can treat opioid overdoses. It can reverse the effects of the overdose and prevent death if it is given quickly. How can I prevent problems when taking prescription opioids? To prevent problems with prescription opioids , be sure to follow your doctor's instructions when taking them. Do not share your medicines with anyone else. Contact your doctor if you have any concerns about taking the medicines. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What are opioids? Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers , such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer. Some health care providers prescribe them for chronic pain . Prescription opioids used for pain relief are generally safe when taken for a short time and as prescribed by your provider. However, opioid use disorder (OUD) is still a possible risk. What is opioid use disorder (OUD)? Opioid use disorder (OUD) means that you have a problematic pattern of using opioids. The pattern causes a lot of distress and impairment (meaning that it causes problems in and interferes with your daily life). Instead of OUD, sometimes people use the terms "opioid dependence" and "opioid addiction." Dependence means feeling withdrawal symptoms when not taking the drug. Addiction is a chronic brain disease that causes a person to compulsively seek out drugs, even though they cause harm. What are the treatments for opioid use disorder (OUD)? Treatments for OUD include: Medicines; this kind of treatment is known as medications for opioid use disorder (MOUD) Counseling and behavioral therapies Residential and hospital-based treatment Which medicines treat opioid opioid use disorder (OUD)? The medicines used in MOUD are methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone: Methadone, buprenorphine, and lofexidine, which can decrease withdrawal symptoms and cravings. They work by acting on one or another of the targets in the brain that opioids act on. But these medicines are different because they do not make you feel high. Some people worry that if they take methadone or buprenorphine, it means that they are substituting one addiction for another. But it is not; these medicines are a treatment. They restore balance to the parts of the brain affected by addiction. This allows your brain to heal while you work toward recovery. You may safely take these medicines for months, years, or even a lifetime. If you want to stop taking them, do not do it on your own. You should contact your provider first, and together you can work out a plan for stopping. Naltrexone works differently than methadone and buprenorphine. It does not help you with withdrawal symptoms or cravings. Instead, it takes away the high that you would normally get when you take opioids. Because of this, you would take naltrexone to prevent a relapse, not to try to get off opioids. You have to be off opioids for at least 7-10 days before you can take naltrexone. Otherwise you could have bad withdrawal symptoms. A combination drug that includes buprenorphine and naloxone. Naloxone is a drug to treat an opioid overdose. If you take it along with buprenorphine, you will be less likely to misuse the buprenorphine. How does counseling help treat opioid use disorder (OUD)? Counseling for OUD can help you: Change your attitudes and behaviors related to drug use Build healthy life skills Stick with other forms of treatment, such as medicines There are different types of counseling for OUD, including: Individual counseling , which may include setting goals, talking about setbacks, and celebrating progress. You may also talk about legal concerns and family problems. Counseling often includes specific behavioral therapies, such as Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), which helps you recognize and stop negative patterns of thinking and behavior. It teaches you coping skills, including how to manage stress and change the thoughts that cause you to want to misuse opioids. Motivational enhancement therapy , which helps you build up motivation to stick with your treatment plan. Contingency management , which focuses on giving you incentives for positive behaviors such as staying off the opioids. Group counseling , which can help you feel that you are not alone with your issues. You get a chance to hear about the difficulties and successes of others who have the same challenges. This can help you learn new strategies for dealing with the situations you may come across. Family counseling , which includes partners or spouses and other family members who are close to you. It can help to repair and improve your family relationships. Counselors can also refer you to other resources that you might need, such as: Peer support groups, including 12-step programs like Narcotics Anonymous Spiritual and faith-based groups HIV testing and hepatitis screening Case or care management Employment or educational supports Organizations that help you find housing or transportation What are residential and hospital-based treatments for opioid use disorder (OUD)? Residential programs combine housing and treatment services. You are living with your peers, and you can support each other to stay in recovery. Inpatient hospital-based programs combine health care and OUD treatment services for people with medical problems. Hospitals may also offer intensive outpatient treatment. All these types of treatments are very structured, and usually include several different kinds of counseling and behavioral therapies. They usually also include MOUD.

You may need to take medicines while you are pregnant . But not all medicines are safe during pregnancy. Many medicines carry risks for you, your baby, or both. Opioids, especially when misused, can cause problems for you and your baby while you are pregnant. What are opioids? Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer. Some providers prescribe them for chronic pain . Prescription opioids used for pain relief are generally safe when taken for a short time and as prescribed by your provider. However, people who take opioids are at risk for opioid use disorder (OUD) and overdose . These risks increase when these medicines are misused. Misuse can include taking your opioid medicines in greater amounts or more often than you are supposed to, using them to get high, or taking someone else's opioids. What are the risks of taking opioids during pregnancy? Taking opioids during pregnancy can cause problems for you and your baby. The possible risks include: Neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) - withdrawal symptoms such as irritability, seizures, vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and poor feeding in newborns Neural tube defects - birth defects of the brain, spine, or spinal cord Congenital heart defects - problems with the structure of the baby's heart Gastroschisis - a birth defect of the baby's abdomen, where the intestines stick outside of the body through a hole beside the belly button Loss of the baby, either miscarriage (before 20 weeks of pregnancy) or stillbirth (after 20 or more weeks) Preterm delivery - a birth before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy Stunted growth, leading to low birthweight Problems with the placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to the baby) If your provider suggests that you take opioids during pregnancy, you should first discuss the risks and benefits. Then if you both decide that you need to take the opioids, you should work together to try to minimize the risks. Some of the ways to do this include: Taking them for the shortest time possible Taking the lowest dose that will help you Carefully following your provider's instructions for taking the medicines Contacting your provider if you have side effects Going to all your follow-up appointments If I am already taking opioids and I become pregnant, what should I do? If you have been taking opioids and you become pregnant, contact your provider. But don't stop taking the opioids on your own. If you suddenly stop taking opioids, it could cause severe health problems for you or your baby. In some cases, stopping suddenly during pregnancy may be more harmful than taking the medicines. Can I breastfeed while taking opioids? If you regularly take opioid medicines, you may be able to breastfeed. It depends on which medicine you are taking. But you should not breastfeed if you have HIV or take illegal drugs . Check with your provider before breastfeeding. What is the treatments for opioid use disorder (OUD) in pregnancy? If you are pregnant and have an opioid use disorder, do not stop taking opioids suddenly. Instead, see your provider so you can get help. The treatment for opioid use disorder (OUD) is called medication for opioid use disorder (MOUD). For MOUD during pregnancy, providers prescribe either buprenorphine or methadone. These medicines can reduce your cravings and help prevent withdrawal. Counseling, including behavioral therapies, can also help you to change your attitudes and behaviors related to drug use and build healthy life skills.

During pregnancy , there are many things you can do to keep yourself and your baby healthy. They include getting regular prenatal care , eating healthy , and staying active. But it's also very important to avoid substances that could be harmful to you and your baby, such as tobacco, alcohol, and drugs. Tobacco Smoking during pregnancy passes nicotine, carbon monoxide , and many other harmful chemicals to your baby. Nicotine is not only a health danger for you, but it can also damage your developing baby's brain and lungs. Carbon monoxide can keep the developing baby from getting enough oxygen. If you smoke while pregnant, it raises the risk of your baby being born too small , too early , or with birth defects . During the first year of life, there is a higher risk of your baby dying from sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). And later in life, your child may be more likely to have health problems, such as asthma and obesity . Other tobacco products, including e-cigarettes , also contain nicotine and are not safe to use during pregnancy. And some of the flavorings used in e-cigarettes may be harmful to developing babies. You will also want to try to avoid secondhand smoke , which has some of the same risks as smoking during pregnancy. Alcohol There is no known amount of alcohol that is safe for you to drink during pregnancy and while trying to get pregnant. All types of alcohol are equally harmful, including all wines and beer. The risks from drinking during pregnancy include problems with the growth of the developing baby and fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD). FASD is a life-long condition that can cause a mix of physical, behavioral, and learning problems. Illegal drugs Using illegal drugs, such as cocaine , methamphetamines , and club drugs , during pregnancy can cause problems for both you and your baby. They may cause low birth weight babies, birth defects, or miscarriage . Your child may be more likely to have learning and developmental disabilities. And if you are injecting the drugs, that puts you at risk for HIV . HIV can be passed along to your baby during pregnancy . Prescription drug misuse Misusing prescription drugs can also be harmful. Misuse can include taking more than your prescribed dose or taking it more often, using it to get high, or taking someone else's medicines. The possible effects of misusing a medicine during pregnancy will depend on which medicine you are misusing. Opioids One type of drug that is a concern during pregnancy is opioids . Opioids include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. Taking opioids during pregnancy can cause problems for you and your baby. The risks include birth defects, preterm birth, the loss of the baby, and neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS). NAS causes withdrawal symptoms in newborn babies. If you have pain and your health care provider suggests that you take prescription opioids during pregnancy, first discuss the risks and benefits with the provider. Then if you both decide that you need to take the opioids, you can work together to try to minimize the risks. Cannabis (marijuana) Cannabis (marijuana) is another drug that could be harmful to your baby. Some research shows that using cannabis during pregnancy is linked to developmental problems in children and teens. More research is needed, but the safest thing to do is stop using it if you are pregnant. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advises that people should not use cannabis while they are pregnant. Getting help If you are pregnant and using any of these substances, contact your provider. Together you and your provider can find the right treatment to help you quit. If you are taking opioids or are addicted to drugs, don't stop taking them suddenly. That can be dangerous to you and the baby. Instead, contact your provider for help with getting off the drugs safely.

If you take a medicine in a way that is different from what the doctor prescribed, it is called prescription drug misuse. It could be: Taking a medicine that was prescribed for someone else Taking a larger dose than you are supposed to Taking the medicine in a different way than you are supposed to. This might be crushing tablets and then snorting or injecting them. Using the medicine for another purpose, such as getting high Misusing some prescription drugs can lead to addiction. These include opioids , sedatives, tranquilizers, and stimulants. Every medicine has some risk of side effects. Doctors take this into account when prescribing medicines. People who misuse these drugs may not understand the risks. The medicines may not be safe for them, especially at higher doses or when taken with other medicines. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

Tobacco use is the most common preventable cause of death. About half of the people who don't quit smoking will die of smoking-related problems. Quitting smoking is important for your health. Soon after you quit, your circulation begins to improve, and your blood pressure starts to return to normal. Your sense of smell and taste return, and it's easier for you to breathe.  In the long term, giving up tobacco can help you live longer. Your risk of getting cancer decreases with each year you stay smoke-free. Quitting is not easy. You may have short-term effects such as weight gain, irritability, and anxiety. Some people try several times before they succeed. There are many ways to quit smoking. Some people stop "cold turkey."  Others benefit from step-by-step manuals, counseling, or medicines or products that help reduce nicotine addiction. Some people think that switching to e-cigarettes can help you quit smoking, but that has not been proven. Your health care provider can help you find the best way for you to quit. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What are opioids? Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer. Some providers prescribe them for chronic pain . Prescription opioids used for pain relief are generally safe when taken for a short time and as prescribed by your provider. However, people who take opioids are at risk for opioid use disorder (OUD) and overdose . These risks increase when opioids are misused. Misuse can include taking more than your prescribed dose or taking it more often, using it to get high, or taking someone else's opioids. How do I know if I need to take opioid medicines? First, you need to talk with your provider about whether you need to take opioids. You should discuss: Whether there are other medicines or therapies that might treat your pain The risks and benefits of taking opioids Your medical history and if you or anyone in your family has a history of substance misuse, a drug addiction , or alcohol use disorder (AUD) Any other medicines and supplements you are taking How much alcohol you drink If you are pregnant or planning to become pregnant What do I need to know if I am going to take opioid medicines? If you and your provider decide that you need to take opioids, make sure that you understand: How to take the medicine - how much and how often. How long you will need to take the medicine. What the possible side effects are. How you should stop the medicines when you no longer need them. If you have been taking opioids for a while, it can be dangerous to just stop suddenly. You may need to get off the medicines slowly. What the warning signs of addiction are, so you can watch for them. They include: Regularly taking more medicine than you are supposed to Taking someone else's opioids Taking the medicine to get high Mood swings, depression, and/or anxiety Needing too much or too little sleep Trouble making decisions Feeling high or sedated If you have a high risk for an overdose, you will want to get naloxone from a pharmacy and carry it with with you wherever you go. Naloxone is a medicine that can reverse the effects of an opioid overdose. How can I take my opioid medicine safely? You should always be careful when taking any medicine, but you need to take extra care when taking opioids: Take your medicine exactly as prescribed - do not take extra doses. Check the instructions every time you take a dose. Do not break, chew, crush, or dissolve opioid pills. Opioids can cause drowsiness. Do not drive or use any machinery that may injure you, especially when you first start the medicine. Contact your provider if you have side effects. If you can, use the same pharmacy for all your medicines. The pharmacy's computer system will alert the pharmacist if you are taking two or more medicines that could cause a dangerous interaction. How can I safely store and dispose opioid medicines? It is important to store and dispose of opioid medicines properly: Store your opioids and other medicines in a safe place. If you have children at home, it's a good idea to store your medicines in a lockbox. Even one accidental dose of an opioid pain medicine meant for an adult can cause a fatal overdose in a child. Also, someone who lives with you or visits your house may look for and steal your opioid medicines to take or sell them. If you travel, carry the current bottle of opioids with you for safety. This will help you answer any questions about your medicine. Dispose of your unused medicine properly. If you have unused opioid medicines at the end of your treatment, you can get rid of them by: Finding a local drug take-back program Finding a pharmacy mail-back program In some cases, flushing them down the toilet - check the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) web site to find out which ones you can flush away Never sell or share your medicines. Your prescription is for you. Your health care provider considers many factors when prescribing opioids. What's safe for you might lead to an overdose for someone else. If someone steals your opioid medicines or prescription, report the theft to the police.

Many people who chew tobacco or dip snuff think it's safer than smoking . But you don't have to smoke tobacco for it to be dangerous. Chewing or dipping carries risks like: Cancer of the mouth Decay of exposed tooth roots Pulling away of the gums from the teeth White patches or red sores in the mouth that can turn to cancer Recent research shows the dangers of smokeless tobacco may go beyond the mouth. It might also play a role in other cancers, heart disease and stroke. Smokeless tobacco contains more nicotine than cigarettes. Nicotine is a highly addictive drug that makes it hard to stop using tobacco once you start. Having a quit date and a quitting plan can help you stop successfully. NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

What are the health effects of smoking? There's no way around it; smoking is bad for your health. It harms nearly every organ of the body, even some that you would not expect. Cigarette smoking causes many cancers and other health problems. It is also the cause of nearly one in five deaths in the United States. Some of the many health problems that smoking can cause include: Cancers. Smoking is the most common cause of lung and oral cancers. But it can also cause cancer in many other parts of your body, such as in your larynx (voice box), esophagus , throat , bladder , kidney , liver , stomach , pancreas , colon and rectum , and cervix . It can also cause acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Lung diseases . Smoking is the most common cause of COPD . It can also worsen asthma and raise your risk of pneumonia . Cardiovascular diseases. Smoking can damage your blood vessels and make them thicken and grow narrower. This makes your heart  beat faster and raises your blood pressure . Smoking also increases your risk of blood clots and stroke . Vision problems . Smoking can raise your risk of cataracts and cause macular degeneration (AMD). People who smoke while pregnant have a greater chance of certain pregnancy problems .   Their babies are also at higher risk of dying of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Smoking also causes addiction to nicotine, a stimulant drug that is in tobacco. Nicotine addiction makes it much harder for people to quit smoking . What are the health risks of secondhand smoke? Your smoke is also bad for other people. If they breathe in your secondhand smoke , they can get many of the same problems as smokers do. These problems can include heart disease and lung cancer. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have a higher risk of ear infections , colds , pneumonia, bronchitis, and more severe asthma . People who breathe secondhand smoke while pregnant are more likely to have preterm labor and babies with low birth weight . Are other forms of tobacco also dangerous? Besides cigarettes, there are several other forms of tobacco. Some people smoke tobacco in cigars and water pipes (hookahs). These forms of tobacco also contain harmful chemicals and nicotine. Some cigars contain as much tobacco as an entire pack of cigarettes. E-cigarettes often look like cigarettes, but they work differently. They are battery-operated smoking devices. Using an e-cigarette is called vaping. Researchers still have a lot to learn about the health effects of using e-cigarettes. We do know that they contain nicotine, which is highly addictive and is a health danger for pregnant people, their developing babies, children, and teens. And e-cigarettes also expose non-smokers to secondhand aerosols (rather than secondhand smoke), which contain harmful chemicals. Smokeless tobacco , such as chewing tobacco and snuff, is also bad for your health. Smokeless tobacco can cause certain cancers, including oral cancer. It also increases your risk of getting heart disease, gum disease , and oral lesions. Why should I quit? Remember, there is no safe level of tobacco use. Smoking even just one cigarette per day over a lifetime can cause smoking-related cancers and premature death. Quitting smoking can reduce your risk of health problems and add years to your life. The earlier you quit, the greater the benefit. Some immediate benefits of quitting include: Lower heart rate and blood pressure Less carbon monoxide in the blood (carbon monoxide reduces the blood's ability to carry oxygen) Better circulation Less coughing and wheezing Quitting smoking can be challenging, but it is so important for your health. Contact your health care provider if you need help quitting.

Smoking cigarettes has many health risks for everyone. However, the younger you are when you start smoking, the more problems it can cause. People who start smoking before the age of 21 have the hardest time quitting. Teens who smoke are also more likely to use alcohol and illegal drugs. The problem is not just cigarettes. Spit tobacco , e-cigarettes , and cigars are not safe alternatives to cigarettes. Low-tar and additive-free tobacco products are not safe either. Young people who do not start using tobacco by age 18 will most likely never start. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Alcohol is the most widely misused substance among America's youth. Drinking by young people has big health and safety risks. It is dangerous because it: Causes many deaths and injuries Can lead to poor decisions about engaging in risky behavior, such as drinking and driving or unprotected sex Increases the risk of physical and sexual assault Can lead to other problems, such as trouble in school May interfere with brain development Increases the risk of alcohol problems later in life Kids often begin drinking to look "cool" or fit in with their peers. Parents can help their kids avoid alcohol problems.  Open communication and conversations about drinking are important. So is being involved in your child's life. Get help for your child if you suspect a drinking problem. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

Acupuncture has been practiced in China and other Asian countries for thousands of years. Acupuncture involves stimulating specific points on the body. This is most often done by inserting thin needles through the skin, to cause a change in the physical functions of the body. Research has shown that acupuncture reduces nausea and vomiting after surgery and chemotherapy. It can also relieve pain. Researchers don't fully understand how acupuncture works. It might aid the activity of your body's pain-killing chemicals. It also might affect how you release chemicals that regulate blood pressure and flow. NIH: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

You have many choices to make about your cancer treatment. One choice you might be thinking about is complementary and alternative medicine (CAM). CAM is the term for medical products and practices that are not part of standard care.  Examples of CAM therapies are acupuncture, chiropractic, and herbal medicines. People with cancer may use CAM to: Help cope with the side effects of cancer treatments Ease worries of cancer treatment and related stress Feel that they are doing something more to help their own care CAM treatments do not work for everyone. Some methods, such as acupuncture, might help with nausea, pain and other side effects of cancer treatment.  Talk to your doctor to make sure that all aspects of your cancer care work together. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Chiropractic is a health care profession. Chiropractors perform adjustments (manipulations) to the spine or other parts of the body. The goal is to correct alignment problems, ease pain, and support the body's natural ability to heal itself. They may also use other treatments including : Heat and ice Electrical stimulation Relaxation techniques Rehabilitative and general exercise Counseling about diet, weight loss, and other lifestyle factors Dietary supplements Many people visit chiropractors for treatment of low back pain , neck pain, and headaches . NIH: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

Many Americans use medical treatments that are not part of mainstream medicine. When you are using these types of care, it may be called complementary, integrative, or alternative medicine. Complementary medicine is used together with mainstream medical care. An example is using acupuncture to help with side effects of cancer treatment. When health care providers and facilities offer both types of care, it is called integrative medicine. Alternative medicine is used instead of mainstream medical care. The claims that non-mainstream practitioners make can sound promising. However, researchers do not know how safe many of these treatments are or how well they work. Studies are underway to determine the safety and usefulness of many of these practices. To minimize the health risks of a non-mainstream treatment: Discuss it with your doctor. It might have side effects or interact with other medicines. Find out what the research says about it Choose practitioners carefully Tell all of your doctors and practitioners about all of the different types of treatments you use NIH: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

Dietary supplements are vitamins , minerals , herbs , and many other products.  They can come as pills, capsules, powders, drinks, and energy bars. Supplements do not have to go through the testing that drugs do. Some supplements can play an important role in health. For example, calcium and vitamin D are important for keeping bones strong. Pregnant women can take the vitamin folic acid to prevent certain birth defects in their babies. To take a supplement as safely as possible: Tell your health care provider about any dietary supplements you use Do not take a bigger dose than the label recommends Check with your health care provider about the supplements you take if you are going to have any type of surgery Read trustworthy information about the supplement NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

An herb is a plant or plant part used for its scent, flavor, or therapeutic properties. Herbal medicines are one type of dietary supplement . They are sold as tablets, capsules, powders, teas, extracts, and fresh or dried plants. People use herbal medicines to try to maintain or improve their health. Many people believe that products labeled "natural" are always safe and good for them. This is not necessarily true. Herbal medicines do not have to go through the testing that drugs do. Some herbs, such as comfrey and ephedra, can cause serious harm. Some herbs can interact with prescription or over-the-counter medicines. If you are thinking about using an herbal medicine, first get information on it from reliable sources. Make sure to tell your health care provider about any herbal medicines you are taking. NIH: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

What is pain? Pain is a signal in your nervous system that something may be wrong. It is an unpleasant feeling, such as a prick, tingle, sting, burn, or ache. Pain may be sharp or dull. It may come and go, or it may be constant. You may feel pain in one area of your body, such as your back , abdomen , chest , pelvis , or you may feel pain all over. There are two types of pain: Acute pain usually comes on suddenly, because of a disease, injury, or inflammation. It can often be diagnosed and treated. It usually goes away, though sometimes it can turn into chronic pain . Chronic pain lasts for a long time, and can cause severe problems What are pain relievers? Pain relievers are medicines that reduce or relieve pain. There are many different pain medicines, and each one has advantages and risks. Some are over-the-counter (OTC) medicines. Others are stronger medicines, which are available by prescription. The most powerful prescription pain relievers are opioids. They are very effective, but people who take them are at risk of addiction and overdose . Because of the side effects and risks of pain relievers, you may want to try non-drug treatments first. And if you do need to take medicines, also doing some non-drug treatments may allow you to take a lower dose. What are some non-drug treatments for pain? There are many non-drug treatments that can help with pain. It is important to check with your health care provider before trying any of them: Acupuncture involves stimulating acupuncture points. These are specific points on your body. There are different acupuncture methods. The most common one involves inserting thin needles through the skin. Others include using pressure, electrical stimulation, and heat. Acupuncture is based on the belief that qi (vital energy) flows through the body along paths, called meridians. Practitioners believe that stimulating the acupuncture points can rebalance the qi. Research suggests that acupuncture can help manage certain pain conditions. Biofeedback techniques use electronic devices to measure body functions such as breathing and heart rate. This teaches you to be more aware of your body functions so you can learn to control them. For example, a biofeedback device may show you measurements of your muscle tension. By watching how these measurements change, you can become more aware of when your muscles are tense and learn to relax them. Biofeedback may help to control pain, including chronic headaches and back pain. Electrical stimulation involves using a device to send a gentle electric current to your nerves or muscles. This can help treat pain by interrupting or blocking the pain signals. Types include Transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) Implanted electric nerve stimulation Deep brain or spinal cord stimulation Massage therapy is a treatment in which the soft tissues of the body are kneaded, rubbed, tapped, and stroked. Among other benefits, it may help people relax, and relieve stress and pain. Meditation is a mind-body practice in which you focus your attention on something, such as an object, word, phrase, or breathing. This helps you to minimize distracting or stressful thoughts or feelings. Physical therapy uses techniques such as heat, cold, exercise, massage, and manipulation. It can help to control pain, as well as condition muscles and restore strength. Psychotherapy (talk therapy) uses methods such as discussion, listening, and counseling to treat mental and behavioral disorders. It can also help people who have pain, especially chronic pain, by Teaching them coping skills, to be able to better deal with the stress that pain can cause Addressing negative thoughts and emotions that can make pain worse Providing them with support Relaxation therapy can help reduce muscle tension and stress, lower blood pressure, and control pain. It may involve tensing and relaxing muscles throughout the body. It may be used with guided imagery (focusing the mind on positive images) and meditation. Surgery can sometimes be necessary to treat severe pain, especially when it is caused by back problems or serious musculoskeletal injuries. There are always risks to getting surgery, and it does not always work to treat pain. So it is important to go through all of the risks and benefits with your health care provider.

A1C is a blood test for type 2 diabetes and prediabetes . It measures your average blood glucose, or blood sugar , level over the past 3 months. Doctors may use the A1C alone or in combination with other diabetes tests to make a diagnosis. They also use the A1C to see how well you are managing your diabetes. This test is different from the blood sugar checks that people with diabetes do every day. Your A1C test result is given in percentages. The higher the percentage, the higher your blood sugar levels have been: A normal A1C level is below 5.7% Prediabetes is between 5.7 to 6.4%. Having prediabetes is a risk factor for getting type 2 diabetes. People with prediabetes may need retests every year. Type 2 diabetes is above 6.5% If you have diabetes, you should have the A1C test at least twice a year. The A1C goal for many people with diabetes is below 7. It may be different for you. Ask what your goal should be. If your A1C result is too high, you may need to change your diabetes care plan. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A biopsy is a procedure that removes cells or tissue from your body.  A doctor called a pathologist looks at the cells or tissue under a microscope to check for damage or disease. The pathologist may also do other tests on it. Biopsies can be done on all parts of the body. In most cases, a biopsy is the only test that can tell for sure if a suspicious area is cancer.  But biopsies are performed for many other reasons too. There are different types of biopsies. A needle biopsy removes tissue with a needle passed through your skin to the site of the problem. Other kinds of biopsies may require surgery.

What are colonoscopy and flexible sigmoidoscopy? Colonoscopy and flexible sigmoidoscopy are procedures that let your doctor look inside your rectum and colon (large intestine). They use instruments called scopes. Scopes have a light and a tiny camera attached to a long, thin tube. These procedures let your doctor see problems such as inflamed tissue, ulcers, polyps , and cancer . Colonoscopy checks your entire colon and rectum. Flexible sigmoidoscopy checks the rectum and the lower colon (sigmoid colon) only. What is a virtual colonoscopy? A virtual colonoscopy also looks inside your rectum and part of your colon. But it does not use a scope. Instead, it is an x-ray test. Another name for this test is CT colonography. Who needs a colonoscopy, virtual colonoscopy, or flexible sigmoidoscopy? You may need a colonoscopy, virtual colonoscopy, or flexible sigmoidoscopy to find the cause of unexplained symptoms such as: Bleeding from your anus (the opening of the rectum through which stool passes out of your body) Changes in your bowel activity, such as diarrhea Pain in your abdomen (belly) Unexplained weight loss Doctors also use these procedures to screen for colon polyps and cancer. Screening is testing for diseases when you have no symptoms. It may find diseases at an early stage, when they are easier to treat. If aren't at higher risk for colorectal cancer, your health care provider will likely recommend you start getting screenings at age 45. If you are at higher risk, you may need to start getting screened for colorectal cancer earlier. There are also other tests to screen for colorectal cancer , including stool tests. Talk with your provider about which test is right for you and when and how often you should get it. How do you prepare for a colonoscopy, virtual colonoscopy, or flexible sigmoidoscopy? To prepare for a colonoscopy, virtual colonoscopy, or flexible sigmoidoscopy, you will need to: Talk with your doctor about any health problems you have and all of the medicines and supplements that you take. You may need to stop taking some of your medicines and/or supplements before the procedure. Follow the bowel prep instructions from your doctor. The bowel prep clears the stool out of your colon, so your doctor will be able to see the colon during the procedure: You may need to follow a clear liquid diet, usually for about one day before the procedure. Avoid red or purple drinks or gelatin; the dye can look like blood in the colon. You probably need to stop eating and drinking the night before the exam. You will need to take some laxatives. They may be pills, a powder that you dissolve in liquid, an enema, or a combination of these. The laxative will cause diarrhea, so you need to stay close to the bathroom. For a virtual colonoscopy, you will also need to drink a contrast medium the night before. The contrast medium is a dye or other substance that is visible on x-rays. It can help your doctor tell the difference between stool and polyps. How are colonoscopy, virtual colonoscopy, and flexible sigmoidoscopy done? For a colonoscopy: You will have the procedure at a hospital or outpatient center. It usually takes 30 to 60 minutes. You will get IV (intravenous) sedatives or anesthesia, usually along with pain medicine, so you won't be awake or feel pain during the procedure. You'll lie on a table while the doctor inserts a colonoscope through your anus and into your rectum and colon. The scope inflates your large intestine with air for a better view. The camera sends a video image to a monitor so your doctor can see your colon. Once the scope reaches the opening to your small intestine, the doctor will slowly remove the scope. While doing so, your doctor will examine your colon again. If you have polyps, your doctor may remove them and send them to a lab for testing. Most polyps aren't cancer, but removing them can prevent them from becoming cancer later on. If you have abnormal tissue, your doctor may do a biopsy . The sedative or anesthesia takes time to wear off completely. You'll stay at the hospital or outpatient center for 1 to 2 hours after the procedure. Then you will need someone to drive you home. For a virtual colonoscopy: You will have the procedure at a hospital or outpatient center. It usually takes about 10 to 15 minutes. You do not need anesthesia. You'll lie on a table while a specially trained x-ray technician inserts a thin tube through your anus and into your rectum. The tube inflates your large intestine with air for a better view. The table slides into a tunnel-shaped device where the technician takes the x-ray images. You will turn over on your side or stomach to get more images taken. For a flexible sigmoidoscopy: You will have the procedure at a hospital, medical office, or outpatient center. It usually takes about 20 minutes. You do not need anesthesia. You'll lie on a table while the doctor inserts a thin tube through your anus and into your rectum. The tube inflates your large intestine with air for a better view. The camera sends a video image to a monitor so your doctor can see your lower colon. Once the scope has reached the top of the lower colon, the doctor will slowly remove the scope. While doing so, your doctor will examine your lower colon again. If you have polyps, your doctor may remove them and send them to a lab for testing. Most polyps aren't cancer, but removing them can prevent them from becoming cancer later on. If you have abnormal tissue, your doctor may do a biopsy. What should I expect after a colonoscopy, virtual colonoscopy, or flexible sigmoidoscopy? You may feel cramping in your abdomen or bloating during the first hour after the any of these procedures. If the doctor removed polyps or performed a biopsy, you may have light bleeding from your anus. This bleeding is normal. For a virtual colonoscopy or a flexible sigmoidoscopy, you go back to your regular activities and diet right after the test. For a colonoscopy, you can expect a full recovery and return to your normal diet by the next day. Your doctor will give you the results of your procedure. If you had a biopsy, it can take a few days to get those results. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) is a disease caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2. There are two types of tests for this virus: A viral test tells you if you have a current infection. Viral tests can either be rapid tests or laboratory tests: Rapid tests can be done in minutes. They are often antigen tests, which look for specific proteins from the virus. Some rapid tests are self-tests which you can do at home. Laboratory tests can take days to complete and include PCR tests . An antibody (serology) test might tell you if you had a past infection. If you need a COVID-19 test, you can: Buy a self-test online or at a store. Make sure that the test you buy has been authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Check your state or local health department's website for information on testing in your area. Contact your health care provider. Even if your COVID-19 viral test is negative (the test did not detect the virus), you should still take steps to protect yourself and others . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Computed tomography (CT) is a type of imaging. It uses special x-ray equipment to make cross-sectional pictures of your body. Doctors use CT scans to look for: Fractures (broken bones) Cancers Blood clots Signs of heart disease Internal bleeding During a CT scan, you lie still on a table. The table slowly passes through the center of a large X-ray machine. The test is painless. During some tests you receive a contrast dye, which makes parts of your body show up better in the image. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Diagnostic imaging lets doctors look inside your body for clues about a medical condition. A variety of machines and techniques can create pictures of the structures and activities inside your body. The type of imaging your doctor uses depends on your symptoms and the part of your body being examined. They include: X-rays CT scans Nuclear medicine scans MRI scans Ultrasound Many imaging tests are painless and easy. Some require you to stay still for a long time inside a machine. This can be uncomfortable. Certain tests involve exposure to a small amount of radiation . For some imaging tests, doctors insert a tiny camera attached to a long, thin tube into your body. This tool is called a scope . The doctor moves it through a body passageway or opening to see inside a particular organ, such as your heart, lungs, or colon. These procedures often require anesthesia.

Endoscopy is a procedure that lets your doctor look inside your body. It uses an instrument called an endoscope, or scope for short.  Scopes have a tiny camera attached to a long, thin tube. The doctor moves it through a body passageway or opening to see inside an organ. Sometimes scopes are used for surgery, such as for removing polyps from the colon. There are many different kinds of endoscopy. Here are the names of some of them and where they look.: Arthroscopy: joints Bronchoscopy: lungs Colonoscopy and sigmoidoscopy: large intestine Cystoscopy and ureteroscopy: urinary system Laparoscopy : abdomen or pelvis Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy: esophagus and stomach

What is genetic testing? Genetic testing is a type of medical test that looks for changes in your DNA. DNA is short for deoxyribonucleic acid. It contains the genetic instructions in all living things. Genetic tests analyze your cells or tissue to look for any changes in: Genes , which are parts of DNA that carry the information needed to make a protein Chromosomes , which are thread-like structures in your cells. They contain DNA and proteins. Proteins , which do most of the work in your cells.  Testing can look for changes in the amount and activity level of proteins. If it finds changes, it might be due to changes in your DNA. Why is genetic testing done? Genetic testing may be done for many different reasons, including to: Find genetic diseases in unborn babies. This is one type of prenatal testing . Screen newborn babies for certain treatable conditions Lower the risk of genetic diseases in embryos that were created using assisted reproductive technology Find out if you carry a gene for a certain disease that could be passed on to your children. This is called carrier testing. See whether you are at increased risk of developing a specific disease. This may be done for a disease that runs in your family. Diagnose certain diseases Identify genetic changes that may be causing or contributing to a disease that you were already diagnosed with Figure out how severe a disease is Help guide your doctor in deciding the best medicine and dosage for you. This is called pharmacogenomic testing . How is genetic testing done? Genetic tests are often done on a blood or cheek swab sample. But they may also be done on samples of hair, saliva, skin, amniotic fluid (the fluid that surrounds a fetus during pregnancy), or other tissue. The sample is sent to a laboratory. There, a lab technician will use one of several different techniques to look for genetic changes. What are the benefits of genetic testing? The benefits of genetic testing include: Helping doctors make recommendations for treatment or monitoring Giving you more information for making decisions about your health and your family's health: If you find out that you are at risk for a certain disease, you might take steps to lower that risk. For example, you may find out that you should be screened for a disease earlier and more often. Or you might decide to make healthy lifestyle changes . If you find out that you are not at risk for a certain disease, then you can skip unnecessary checkups or screenings A test could give you information that helps you make decisions about having children Identifying genetic disorders early in life so treatment can be started as soon as possible What are the drawbacks of genetic testing? The physical risks of the different types of genetic testing are small. But there can be emotional, social, or financial drawbacks: Depending on the results, you may feel angry, depressed, anxious, or guilty. This can be especially true if you are diagnosed with a disease that does not have effective treatments. You may be worried about genetic discrimination in employment or insurance Genetic testing may give you limited information about a genetic disease. For example, it cannot tell you whether you will have symptoms, how severe a disease might be, or whether a disease will get worse over time. Some genetic tests are expensive, and health insurance might only cover part of the cost. Or they may not cover it at all. How do I decide whether to be tested? The decision about whether to have genetic testing is complex. In addition to discussing the test with your health care provider, you can meet with a genetic counselor . Genetic counselors have specialized degrees and experience in genetics and counseling. They can help you understand the tests and weigh the risks and benefits. If you do get a test, they can explain the results and make sure that you have the support that you need.

You have two kidneys. They are fist-sized organs on either side of your backbone above your waist. Your kidneys filter and clean your blood, taking out waste products and making urine. Kidney tests check to see how well your kidneys are working. They include blood, urine , and imaging tests. Early kidney disease usually does not have signs or symptoms. Testing is the only way to know how your kidneys are doing. It is important for you to get checked for kidney disease if you have the key risk factors - diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, or a family history of kidney failure. Specific kidney tests include: Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) - one of the most common blood tests to check for chronic kidney disease . It tells how well your kidneys are filtering. Creatinine blood and urine tests - check the levels of creatinine, a waste product that your kidneys remove from your blood Albumin urine test - checks for albumin, a protein that can pass into the urine if the kidneys are damaged Imaging tests, such as an ultrasound - provide pictures of the kidneys. The pictures help the health care provider see the size and shape of the kidneys, and check for anything unusual. Kidney biopsy - a procedure that involves taking a small piece of kidney tissue for examination with a microscope. It checks for the cause of kidney disease and how damaged your kidneys are. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Laboratory tests check a sample of your blood, urine, or body tissues. A technician or your doctor analyzes the test samples to see if your results fall within the normal range. The tests use a range because what is normal differs from person to person. Many factors affect test results. These include: Your sex, age and race What you eat and drink Medicines you take How well you followed pre-test instructions Your doctor may also compare your results to results from previous tests. Laboratory tests are often part of a routine checkup to look for changes in your health. They also help doctors diagnose medical conditions, plan or evaluate treatments, and monitor diseases.

What is a mammogram? A mammogram is an x-ray picture of the breast. Health care providers use mammograms to look for early signs of breast cancer . There are two types of mammograms: screening mammograms and diagnostic mammograms. What is a screening mammogram? A screening mammogram is a mammogram usually done for women who have no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Regular screening mammograms can help reduce the number of deaths from breast cancer among women ages 40 to 74. This is because they can find breast cancer early and treatment can start earlier, maybe before it has spread. But screening mammograms can also have risks. They can sometimes find something that looks abnormal but isn't cancer. This leads to further testing and can cause you anxiety. Sometimes mammograms can miss cancer when it is there. It also exposes you to radiation . You should talk to your provider about the benefits and drawbacks of mammograms. Together, you can decide when to start and how often to have a mammogram. Not much is known about breast cancer risk in transgender people. If you are transgender, talk to your provider about your risk and whether you need screening mammograms. What is a diagnostic mammogram? A diagnostic mammogram is done for people who have a lump or other signs or symptoms of breast cancer. The signs can include breast pain, thickening of the skin of the breast, nipple discharge, or a change in breast size or shape. But these signs can also be caused by a breast condition that is benign (not cancer). A mammogram, along with other tests, can help your provider figure out whether you have cancer. How is a mammogram done? When you have a mammogram, you stand in front of an x-ray machine. The person who takes the x-rays places your breast between two plastic plates. The plates press your breast and make it flat. This may be uncomfortable, but it helps get a clear picture. You will get both breasts x-rayed from the front and from the side. Afterwards, a radiologist (a doctor with special training) will read the mammogram. The doctor will look at the x-ray for early signs of breast cancer or other problems. You will usually get the results within a few weeks, although it depends on the clinic or medical office that you went to. If your results are not normal, you should hear back earlier. Contact your provider or the office where you had the mammogram if you do not receive a report of your results within 30 days. What happens if my mammogram is not normal? An abnormal (not normal) mammogram does not always mean that there is cancer. You will need to have additional mammograms, tests, or exams before your provider can tell for sure. You may also be referred to a breast specialist or a surgeon. But it does not necessarily mean you have cancer or need surgery. You would see one of these doctors because they are experts in diagnosing breast problems.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses a large magnet and radio waves to look at organs and structures inside your body. Health care professionals use MRI scans to diagnose a variety of conditions, from torn ligaments to tumors. MRIs are very useful for examining the brain and spinal cord. During the scan, you lie on a table that slides inside a tunnel-shaped machine. Doing the scan can take a long time, and you must stay still. The scan is painless. The MRI machine makes a lot of noise. The technician may offer you earplugs. Before you get a scan, tell your doctor if you : Are pregnant Have pieces of metal in your body. You might have metal in your body if you have a shrapnel or bullet injury or if you are a welder. Have metal or electronic devices in your body, such as a cardiac pacemaker or a metal artificial joint

Nuclear scans use radioactive substances to see structures and functions inside your body. They use a special camera that detects radioactivity. Before the test, you receive a small amount of radioactive material. You may get it as an injection. Sometimes you swallow it or inhale it.   Then you lie still on a table while the camera makes images. Most scans take 20 to 45 minutes. Nuclear scans can help doctors diagnose many conditions, including cancers, injuries, and infections. They can also show how organs like your heart and lungs are working.

Prenatal testing provides information about your baby's health before he or she is born. Some routine tests during pregnancy also check on your health. At your first prenatal visit , your health care provider will test for a number of things, including problems with your blood, signs of infections , and whether you are immune to rubella (German measles) and chickenpox . Throughout your pregnancy, your health care provider may suggest a number of other tests, too. Some tests are suggested for all women, such as screenings for gestational diabetes , Down syndrome , and HIV . Other tests might be offered based on your: Age Personal or family medical history Ethnic background Results of routine tests There are two types of tests: Screening tests are tests that are done to see if you or your baby might have certain problems. They evaluate risk, but do not diagnose problems. If your screening test result is abnormal, it does not mean that there is a problem. It means that more information is needed. Your health care provider can explain what the test results mean and possible next steps. You may need diagnostic testing. Diagnostic tests show whether or not you or your baby have a certain problem. It is your choice whether or not to get the prenatal tests. You and your health care provider can discuss the risks and benefits of the tests, and what kind of information the tests can give you. Then you can decide which ones are right for you. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. Thyroid tests check how well your thyroid is working. They are also used to diagnose and help find the cause of thyroid diseases such as hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism . Thyroid tests include blood tests and imaging tests. Blood tests for your thyroid include: TSH . It measures thyroid-stimulating hormone. This is usually the first test your healthcare provider will order. T3 and T4 . They measure the level of the different thyroid hormones in your blood. Thyroid antibodies test . It measures certain thyroid antibodies (markers in the blood). This test may help diagnose autoimmune thyroid disorders. Imaging tests include: CT scans Ultrasound Nuclear medicine tests , including: Thyroid scan. It uses small amounts of radioactive material to create a picture of the thyroid, showing its size, shape, and position. It can help find the cause of hyperthyroidism and check for thyroid nodules (lumps in the thyroid). Radioactive iodine uptake test, or thyroid uptake test. It checks how well your thyroid is working and can help find the cause of hyperthyroidism. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your vital signs show how well your body is functioning. They are usually measured at doctor's offices, often as part of a health checkup , or during an emergency room visit. They include: Blood pressure, which measures the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Blood pressure that is too high or too low can cause problems. Your blood pressure has two numbers. The first number is the pressure when your heart beats and is pumping the blood.  The second is from when your heart is at rest, between beats. A normal blood pressure reading for adults is lower than 120/80 and higher than 90/60. Heart rate, or pulse, which measures how fast your heart is beating. A problem with your heart rate may be an arrhythmia . Your normal heart rate depends on factors such as your age, how much you exercise, whether you are sitting or standing, which medicines you take, and your weight. Respiratory rate, which measures your breathing. Mild breathing changes can be from causes such as a stuffy nose or hard exercise. But slow or fast breathing can also be a sign of a serious breathing problem . Temperature, which measures how hot your body is. A body temperature that is higher than normal (over 98.6 F, or 37 C) is called a fever .

X-rays are a type of radiation called electromagnetic waves. X-ray imaging creates pictures of the inside of your body. The images show the parts of your body in different shades of black and white. This is because different tissues absorb different amounts of radiation. Calcium in bones absorbs x-rays the most, so bones look white. Fat and other soft tissues absorb less and look gray. Air absorbs the least, so lungs look black. The most familiar use of x-rays is checking for fractures (broken bones), but x-rays are also used in other ways. For example, chest x-rays can spot pneumonia. Mammograms use x-rays to look for breast cancer. When you have an x-ray, you may wear a lead apron to protect certain parts of your body. The amount of radiation you get from an x-ray is small. For example, a chest x-ray gives out a radiation dose similar to the amount of radiation you're naturally exposed to from the environment over 10 days.

What are antibiotics? Antibiotics are medicines that treat bacterial infections in humans and animals. They work by killing the bacteria or making it hard for the bacteria to grow and multiply. When used properly, antibiotics can save lives. But there is a growing problem of antibiotic resistance. What is antibiotic resistance? Antibiotic resistance happens when bacteria change and can resist the effects of an antibiotic. The bacteria are not killed, and they continue to grow. The infections these bacteria cause are called resistant infections. Resistant infections can be difficult, and sometimes impossible, to treat. In some cases, they can even be deadly. Antibiotic resistance does not mean that your body is resistant to antibiotics. There are many different types of resistant infections. They include MRSA and drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB). If you get a resistant infection, you might need: A long hospital stay A long recovery Follow-up visits with health care providers Treatments that are expensive and may have severe side effects Antibiotic resistance is one type of antimicrobial resistance. There are other types; viruses , fungi , and parasites can also become resistant to medicines. How do bacteria become resistant to antibiotics? Antibiotic resistance is a natural process that happens over time. To survive, bacteria can develop defense strategies against antibiotics. This happens through genetic changes in the bacteria. These resistant bacteria survive, grow, and spread. Each time you take antibiotics, there is a risk that the bacteria will become resistant. So it is important to only take antibiotics when you really need them. They won't work on viral infections such as colds and the flu . And you don't need antibiotics for every bacterial infection. For example, you may not need them for some sinus and ear infections. Who is more likely to develop an antibiotic-resistant infection? Anyone can develop an antibiotic-resistant infection, but certain people may be at higher risk, including those who: Have a weakened immune system from diseases such as HIV or from taking medicines that affect the immune system Are getting medical care such as surgery and hospital stays Take antibiotics for a long time Are infants, especially if they were born prematurely Are older adults How can antibiotic resistance be prevented? There will always be some antibiotic resistance, since it happens naturally. But you can help fight against antibiotic resistance by taking these steps: Don't use antibiotics for viruses. Don't pressure your health care provider to give you an antibiotic if they don't think you need one. When you take antibiotics, follow the directions carefully. Don't share your antibiotics with others. Don't save antibiotics for later or use someone else's prescription. Help prevent the spread of bacterial infections with good hygiene habits . These include washing your hands often and covering your mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are antibiotics? Antibiotics are medicines that fight bacterial infections in people and animals. They work by killing the bacteria or by making it hard for the bacteria to grow and multiply. Antibiotics can be taken in different ways: Orally (by mouth). This could be pills, capsules, or liquids. Topically. This might be a cream, spray, or ointment that you put on your skin. It could also be eye ointment, eye drops, or ear drops. Through an injection or intravenously (IV). This is usually for more serious infections. What do antibiotics treat? Antibiotics only treat certain bacterial infections, such as strep throat, urinary tract infections , and E. coli . You may not need to take antibiotics for some bacterial infections. For example, you might not need them for many sinus infections or some ear infections . Taking antibiotics when they're not needed won't help you, and they can have side effects. Your health care provider can decide the best treatment for you when you're sick. Don't ask your provider to prescribe an antibiotic for you. Do antibiotics treat viral infections? Antibiotics do not work on viral infections. For example, you shouldn't take antibiotics for: Colds and runny noses, even if the mucus is thick, yellow, or green Most sore throats (except strep throat) Flu Most cases of bronchitis What are the side effects of antibiotics? The side effects of antibiotics range from minor to very severe. Some of the common side effects include: Rash Nausea Diarrhea Yeast infections More serious side effects can include: C. diff infections , which cause diarrhea that can lead to severe colon damage and sometimes even death Severe and life-threatening allergic reactions Antibiotic resistance infections Call your health care provider if you develop any side effects while taking your antibiotic. Why is it important to take antibiotics only when they're needed? You should only take antibiotics when they are needed because they can cause side effects and can contribute to antibiotic resistance . Antibiotic resistance happens when the bacteria change and become able to resist the effects of an antibiotic. This means that the bacteria continue to grow. How do I use antibiotics correctly? When you take antibiotics, it is important that you take them responsibly: Always follow the directions carefully. Finish your medicine even if you feel better. If you stop taking them too soon, some bacteria may survive and re-infect you. Don't save your antibiotics for later. Don't share your antibiotic with others. Don't take antibiotics prescribed for someone else. This may delay the best treatment for you, make you even sicker, or cause side effects. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are antidepressants? Antidepressants are prescription medicines to treat depression. Depression is more than feeling a little sad or "blue" for a few days. It's a very common, serious medical illness that affects your mood and general mental health It can make you feel tired, hopeless, worried, or fearful. It can change your thinking, sleeping, and eating. Depression may make some people think about ending their lives. But antidepressants can help many people who have depression. Researchers think antidepressants may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. Are antidepressants used for other conditions? A health care provider may prescribe antidepressants for anxiety , chronic pain , or insomnia . Sometimes providers also prescribe antidepressants for other conditions. What are the different types of antidepressants? There are many types of antidepressants. Each one works differently. Providers usually prescribe newer antidepressants first because they don't cause as many side effects as older types. They also seem to help more kinds of depression and anxiety problems. Most of the newer antidepressants belong to one of these three groups: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) Atypical antidepressants, which are newer antidepressants that don't fit into the other groups If these antidepressants don't help, your provider might suggest one of the older antidepressants. The older types include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Even though these antidepressants may cause more serious side effects, the benefits may outweigh the risks for some people. Which type of antidepressant is right for me? Our bodies and brains all work differently. That means one antidepressant won't work for everyone.  You may need to try two or more medicines before you find one that works for you. Your provider will work with you to choose the best option to try first. You'll consider questions such as: Which symptoms bother you most? Some antidepressants may do a better job helping specific symptoms, such as trouble sleeping. What other medicines and supplements do you take? Some antidepressants can cause problems if you take them with certain medicines and herbs. Did a certain antidepressant work well for a close relative? An antidepressant that helped a parent, brother, or sister could be a good choice for you, too. Do you have other health conditions? Certain antidepressants can make some other conditions better or worse. Any other conditions that you have will be part of choosing your depression treatment. Are you pregnant, planning for pregnancy, or breastfeeding? If so, your provider will help you find a way to treat your depression that's safe for you and your baby. How long do antidepressants take to work? Antidepressants usually take 4 to 8 weeks to work, so you'll need to be patient. You may notice that some problems, such as sleeping and eating, get better before your mood improves. That's a good sign. You may just need to give the medicine a little more time to do its job. Sometimes an antidepressant helps at first, but symptoms return while you're still taking it. But there's usually another one you can try. To get more relief from depression, your provider may suggest combining two antidepressants, using another kind of medicine with an antidepressant, or adding talk therapy or other approaches to improve your mental health . How long will I need to take an antidepressant? When an antidepressant starts to work, you and your provider can decide how long you need to stay on it. The typical length of treatment is 6 to 12 months, but some people may stay on antidepressants for much longer. What are the side effects of antidepressants? Not everyone has side effects from antidepressants. But if you do have them, they're usually mild and may get better over time as your body gets used to the new medicine. The most common side effects from antidepressants include: Nausea and vomiting Weight gain Diarrhea Sleepiness Sexual problems, such as a lack of desire or ability to have sex When thinking about side effects, it's important to remember that there are also risks from not treating depression. Your provider can help you think through the pros and cons of all your options. If you have any side effects from antidepressants, your provider may suggest ways to manage them while you wait to see if the antidepressant will work. If the side effects bother you too much, you may need to change antidepressants. But you should never change your dose or stop taking an antidepressant on your own. If you have serious problems or notice any changes that worry you, such as new or worsening symptoms, unusual changes in your mood, or you start acting differently, call your provider right away. In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may be more likely to think about hurting or killing themselves when starting antidepressants or when the dose is changed. Get medical help right away if this happens. What can I do to take antidepressants safely? Antidepressants are generally safe when you use them correctly: Tell your provider about everything you take. That includes medicines, herbs, supplements, and over-the-counter medicines you take, such as pain relievers and decongestants. Be honest about recreational drugs and alcohol, too. Try to get all your medicines from the same pharmacy. That way the pharmacist can warn you and your provider if you take medicines that may cause problems when used together. Follow all instructions about how to take your medicine. Talk with your provider if side effects bother you. Never stop taking antidepressants without your provider's help. Stopping too fast may make depression come back. You could even make your condition worse. To stop antidepressants safely, you need to give your body time to get used to being without the medicine. Your provider can tell you the safest way to go off an antidepressant. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is high blood pressure? High blood pressure , also called hypertension, is when blood puts too much pressure against the walls of your arteries. Almost half of American adults have high blood pressure, usually with no symptoms. But it can cause serious problems such as stroke , heart failure , heart attack , and kidney disease . What lifestyle changes can help lower high blood pressure? Healthy lifestyle changes can help reduce high blood pressure: Losing weight Being physically active Managing stress Reducing sodium in your diet Avoiding alcohol , tobacco , and illegal drugs Getting enough sleep What if lifestyle changes alone cannot lower blood pressure? Sometimes lifestyle changes alone cannot control or lower your high blood pressure. In that case, your health care provider may prescribe blood pressure medicines. How do blood pressure medicines work? The most commonly used blood pressure medicines work in different ways to lower blood pressure: Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) keep your blood vessels from narrowing as much and allows blood to move through them with less pressure. Beta blockers help your heart beat slower and with less force. This means that your heart pumps less blood through your blood vessels. Beta blockers are typically used only as a backup option or if you also have certain other conditions. Calcium channel blockers prevent calcium from entering the muscle cells of your heart and blood vessels. This allows the blood vessels to relax. Diuretics remove extra water and sodium (salt) from your body. This lowers the amount of fluid in your blood. Diuretics are often used with other high blood pressure medicines, sometimes in one combined pill. Often, two or more medicines work better than one. If these medicines do not lower your blood pressure enough, your provider may suggest that you take another type of blood pressure medicine. While taking the medicines, it is still important to keep up with your healthy lifestyle changes. Doing both helps keep blood pressure lower than lifestyle changes or medicines alone. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What are blood thinners? Blood thinners are medicines that prevent blood clots from forming. They do not break up clots that you already have. But they can stop those clots from getting bigger. It's important to treat blood clots, because clots in your blood vessels and heart can cause heart attacks , strokes , and blockages. Who needs blood thinners? You may need a blood thinner if you have: Certain heart or blood vessel diseases An abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation A heart valve replacement A risk of blood clots after surgery Congenital heart defects What are the different types of blood thinners? There are different types of blood thinners: Anticoagulants, such as heparin or warfarin (also called Coumadin), slow down your body's process of making clots. Antiplatelets, such as aspirin and clopidogrel, prevent blood cells called platelets from clumping together to form a clot. Antiplatelets are mainly taken by people who have had a heart attack or stroke. How can I take blood thinners safely? When you take a blood thinner, follow the directions carefully. Blood thinners may interact with certain foods, medicines, vitamins, and alcohol. Make sure that your health care provider knows all of the medicines and supplements you are using. You may need regular blood tests to check how well your blood is clotting. It is important to make sure that you're taking enough medicine to prevent clots, but not so much that it causes bleeding. What are the side effects of blood thinners? Bleeding is the most common side effect of blood thinners. They can also cause an upset stomach, nausea , and diarrhea . Other possible side effects can depend on which type of blood thinner that you are taking. Call your provider if you have any sign of serious bleeding, such as: Menstrual bleeding that is much heavier than normal Red or brown urine Bowel movements that are red or black Bleeding from the gums or nose that does not stop quickly Vomit that is brown or bright red Coughing up something red Severe pain, such as a headache or stomachache Unusual bruising A cut that does not stop bleeding A serious fall or bump on the head Dizziness or weakness

What is cancer chemotherapy? Cancer chemotherapy is a type of cancer treatment. It uses medicines to destroy cancer cells. Normally, the cells in your body grow and die in a controlled way. Cancer cells keep growing without control. Chemotherapy works by killing the cancer cells, stopping them from spreading, or slowing their growth. Chemotherapy is used to: Treat cancer by curing the cancer, lessening the chance it will return, or stopping or slowing its growth. Ease cancer symptoms by shrinking tumors that are causing pain and other problems. What are the side effects of chemotherapy? Chemotherapy does not just destroy cancer cells. It can also harm some healthy cells, which causes side effects. You may have a lot of side effects, some side effects, or none at all. It depends on the type and amount of chemotherapy you get and how your body reacts. Some common side effects are: Mouth sores Fatigue Nausea and vomiting Pain Hair loss There are ways to prevent or control some side effects. Talk with your health care provider about how to manage them. Healthy cells usually recover after chemotherapy is over, so most side effects gradually go away. What can I expect when getting chemotherapy? You may get chemotherapy in a hospital or at home, a doctor's office, or a medical clinic. You might be given the medicines by mouth, in a shot, as a cream, through a catheter, or intravenously (by IV). Your treatment plan will depend on the type of cancer you have, which chemotherapy medicines are used, the treatment goals, and how your body responds to the medicines. Chemotherapy may be given alone or with other treatments. You may get treatment every day, every week, or every month. You may have breaks between treatments so that your body has a chance to build new healthy cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What are cold and cough medicines? Cold and cough medicines can help relieve symptoms of a common cold . The symptoms of a cold can include a sore throat, stuffy or runny nose, sneezing, and coughing . You don't usually need to treat a cold or the cough that it causes. You can't cure a cold, and antibiotics won't help you get better. But sometimes the symptoms can keep you awake or cause a lot of discomfort. In that case, cold and cough medicines can sometimes be helpful. What are the different types of cold and cough medicines? There are lots of different cold and cough medicines, and they do different things: Nasal decongestants - unclog a stuffy nose Cough suppressants - quiet a cough Expectorants - loosen mucus in your lungs so you can cough it up Antihistamines - stop runny noses and sneezing Pain relievers - ease fever, headaches, and minor aches and pains What do I need to know about taking cold and cough medicines? Before taking these medicines, read the labels and follow the instructions carefully. Many cold and cough medicines contain the same active ingredients. For example, some of them include pain relievers. If you are taking these medicines and are also taking a separate pain reliever, you could be getting a dangerous amount of the pain reliever. Do not give cold or cough medicines to children under two, and don't give aspirin to children. What else can I do to feel better for a cold or cough? If you decide that you don't want to take cold and cough medicines, there are other ways to feel better: Drink lots of fluids Get plenty of rest Use a cool mist humidifier Use saline nose drops or sprays Use nasal suctioning with a bulb syringe, which can be very helpful in children under a year old Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from the foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin. With type 2 diabetes ,your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose can't get into your cells as quickly as usual. The glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. What are the treatments for diabetes? Treatments for diabetes can depend on the type. Common treatments include a diabetic meal plan , regular physical activity, and medicines. Some less common treatments are weight loss surgery for either type and an artificial pancreas or pancreatic islet transplantation for some people with type 1 diabetes. Who needs diabetes medicines? People with type 1 diabetes need to take a diabetes medicine called insulin to control their blood sugar. Some people with type 2 diabetes can control their blood sugar with healthy food choices and physical activity. But for others, a diabetic meal plan and physical activity are not enough. They need to take diabetes medicines. The kind of medicine you take depends on your type of diabetes, daily schedule, medicine costs, and any other health conditions that you have. Over time, you may need to take more than one diabetes medicine. What are the types of medicines for type 1 diabetes? If you have type 1 diabetes, you must take insulin because your body no longer makes it. There are different types of insulin that start to work at different speeds, and the effects of each last a different length of time. Your health care provider will measure your blood glucose to decide on the type of insulin. You may need to use more than one type. You will also need to check your blood sugar at home.  Your provider will tell you how often. The results of your blood sugar testing can help you make decisions about food, physical activity, and medicines. You can take insulin several different ways. The most common are with a needle and syringe, an insulin pen, or an insulin pump. If you use a needle and syringe or a pen, you have to take insulin several times during the day, including with meals. An insulin pump gives you small, steady doses throughout the day. Less common ways to take insulin include inhalers, injection ports, and jet injectors. In rare cases, taking insulin alone might not be enough to manage your blood sugar. Then you would need to take another diabetes medicine. What are the types of medicines for type 2 diabetes? There are several different medicines for type 2 diabetes. Each works in a different way. Many of them are pills. There are also medicines that you inject under your skin, such as insulin. Over time, you may need more than one diabetes medicine to manage your blood sugar. You might add another diabetes medicine or switch to a combination medicine.  A combination medicine contains more than one type of diabetes medicine in the same pill. Some people with type 2 diabetes take both pills and injections. Even if you don't usually take insulin, you may need it at special times, such as during pregnancy or if you are in the hospital. What else should I know about taking medicines for diabetes? Even if you take medicines for diabetes, you still need to eat a healthy diet, stop smoking, take your other medicines, and get regular physical activity. These will help you manage your diabetes. It is important to make sure that you understand your diabetes treatment plan. Talk to your provider about: What your target blood sugar level is What to do if your blood sugar gets too low or too high Whether your diabetes medicines will affect other medicines you take If you will have any side effects from the diabetes medicines You should not change or stop your diabetes medicines on your own. Talk to your provider first. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Most of the time, medicines make our lives better. They reduce aches and pains, fight infections, and control problems such as high blood pressure or diabetes. But medicines can also cause unwanted reactions, such as drug interactions, side effects, and allergies. What is a drug interaction? A drug interaction is a change in the way a drug acts in the body when taken with certain other drugs, foods, or supplements or when taken while you have certain medical conditions. Examples include: Two drugs, such as aspirin and blood thinners Drugs and food, such as statins and grapefruit Drugs and supplements, such as gingko and blood thinners Drugs and medical conditions, such as aspirin and peptic ulcers Interactions could cause a drug to be more or less effective, cause side effects, or change the way one or both drugs work. What are side effects? Side effects are unwanted, usually unpleasant, effects caused by medicines. Most are mild, such as a stomachache, dry mouth , or drowsiness, and go away after you stop taking the medicine.  Others can be more serious. Sometimes a drug can interact with a disease that you have and cause a side effect. For example, if you have a heart condition, certain decongestants can cause you to have a rapid heartbeat. What are drug allergies? Drug allergies are another type of reaction. They can range from mild to life-threatening. Skin reactions, such as hives and rashes , are the most common type. Anaphylaxis , a serious allergic reaction, is less common. How can I stay safe when taking medicines? When you start a new prescription or over-the-counter medicine, make sure you understand how to take it correctly . Know which other medicines, foods, and supplements you need to avoid. Always talk to your health care provider or pharmacist if you have questions about your medicines.

Before any drug can be sold in the United States, it must be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This is true whether it's a prescription or an over-the-counter drug. The FDA evaluates both the effectiveness and safety of a drug by looking at: How animal testing and human clinical trials affect the condition the drug is treating If any side effects occur How it's manufactured What the labeling says The FDA also monitors a drug's safety after approval. Health care providers and patients can report drug side effects through the FDA's MedWatch website . For you, drug safety means buying online only from licensed pharmacies located in the United States. It also means knowing how to take your medicines correctly .

What is HIV? HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. It harms your immune system by destroying CD4 cells. These are a type of white blood cells that fight infection. The loss of these cells makes it hard for your body to fight off infections and certain HIV-related cancers. Without treatment, HIV can gradually destroy the immune system and advance to AIDS. AIDS stands for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. It is the final stage of infection with HIV. Not everyone with HIV develops AIDS. What is antiretroviral therapy (ART)? The treatment of HIV with medicines is called antiretroviral therapy (ART). It involves taking a combination of medicines every day. ART is recommended for everyone who has HIV. The medicines do not cure HIV infection, but help people with HIV live longer, healthier lives. They also reduce the risk of spreading the virus to others. How do HIV medicines work? HIV medicines reduce the amount of HIV (viral load) in your body, which helps by: Giving your immune system a chance to recover. Even though there is still some HIV in your body, your immune system should be strong enough to fight off infections and certain HIV-related cancers. Reducing the risk that you will spread HIV to others. What are the types of HIV medicines? There are many different types (called classes) of HIV medicines. Some work by blocking or changing enzymes that HIV needs to make copies of itself. This prevents HIV from copying itself, which reduces the amount of HIV in the body. Several types of medicines do this: Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) block an enzyme called reverse transcriptase Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) bind to and later change reverse transcriptase Integrase inhibitors , also called integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs), block an enzyme called integrase Protease inhibitors (PIs) block an enzyme called protease Some types of HIV medicines interfere with HIV's ability to infect CD4 immune system cells: Fusion inhibitors block HIV from entering the cells CCR5 antagonists and post-attachment inhibitors block different molecules on the CD4 cells. To infect a cell, HIV has to bind to two types of molecules on the cell's surface. Blocking either of these molecules prevents HIV from entering the cells. Attachment inhibitors bind to a specific protein on the outer surface of HIV. This prevents HIV from entering the cell. Pharmacokinetic enhancers are another type of medicine. They are sometimes taken along with certain other HIV medicines. Pharmacokinetic enhancers increase the effectiveness of the other medicine. They work by slowing the breakdown of the other medicine. This allows that medicine to stay in the body longer at a higher concentration. There are also multidrug combinations , which include a combination of two or more different types of HIV medicines. When do I need to start taking HIV medicines? It's important to start taking HIV medicines as soon as possible after your diagnosis, especially if you: Are pregnant Have AIDS Have certain HIV-related illnesses and infections Have an early HIV infection (the first 6 months after infection with HIV) What else do I need to know about taking HIV medicines? You and your health care provider will work together to come up with a personal treatment plan. This plan will be based on many factors, including: The possible side effects of HIV medicines Potential drug interactions with any other medicines you take How many medicines you will need to take every day Any other health problems you may have It's important to take your medicines every day, according to the instructions from your provider. If you miss doses or don't follow a regular schedule, your treatment may not work, and the HIV virus may become resistant to the medicines. HIV medicines can cause side effects. Most of these side effects are manageable, but a few can be serious. Tell your provider about any side effects that you are having. Don't stop taking your medicine without first talking to your provider. There may be steps you can take to help manage the side effects. In some cases, your provider may decide to change your medicines. What are HIV PrEP and PEP medicines? HIV medicines are not just used for treatment. Some people take them to prevent HIV . PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) is for people who don't already have HIV but are at very high risk of getting it. PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) is for people who have possibly been exposed to HIV. NIH: Office of AIDS Research

What are PrEP and PEP? PrEP and PEP are medicines to prevent HIV . Each type is used in a different situation: PrEP stands for pre-exposure prophylaxis. It is for people who don't already have HIV but are at risk of getting it. PrEP is medicine that can reduce this risk. It can either be a pill that you take every day or an injection that you get every two months. With PrEP, if you do get exposed to HIV, the medicine can stop HIV from taking hold and spreading throughout your body. PEP stands for post-exposure prophylaxis. PEP is for people who have possibly been exposed to HIV. It is only for emergency situations. PEP must be started within 72 hours after a possible exposure to HIV. PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) Who should consider taking PrEP? PrEP can help protect you if you don't have HIV and any of these applies to you: You have had anal or vaginal sex in the past 6 months and: Have a sexual partner with HIV, Have not consistently used a condom, OR Have been diagnosed with a sexually transmitted infection (STI) in the past 6 months You inject drugs and: Share needles or other equipment to inject drugs OR Have an injection partner with HIV You have been prescribed PEP and: Continue engaging in high-risk behaviors OR Have used multiple courses of PEP If you have a partner who is HIV-positive and are considering getting pregnant, talk to your health care provider about PrEP. Taking it may help protect you and your baby from getting HIV infection while you try to get pregnant, during pregnancy , or while breastfeeding. How well does PrEP work? PrEP is very effective when you take it consistently. It reduces the risk of getting HIV from sex by about 99%. In people who inject drugs, it reduces the risk of HIV by at least 74%. PrEP is much less effective if you do not take it consistently. PrEP does not protect against other STIs, so you should still use latex condoms every time you have sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. You must have an HIV test every 3 months while taking PrEP, so you'll have regular follow-up visits with your health care provider. If you are having trouble taking PrEP every day or if you want to stop taking PrEP, talk to your provider. Does PrEP cause side effects? Some people taking PrEP may have side effects, like nausea. The side effects are usually not serious and often get better over time. If you are taking PrEP, tell your provider if you have a side effect that bothers you or that does not go away. PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) Who should consider taking PEP? If you are HIV-negative and you think you may have been recently exposed to HIV, contact your health care provider immediately or go to an emergency room right away. You may be prescribed PEP if you are HIV negative or don't know your HIV status, and in the last 72 hours you may have been exposed to HIV: During sex, for example if a condom broke during sex with someone who could have HIV, Through the sharing of needles or drug preparation equipment, OR Through sexual assault Your provider or emergency room doctor will help to decide whether PEP is right for you. PEP may also be given to a health care worker after a possible exposure to HIV at work, for example, from a needlestick injury. When should I start PEP and how long do I need to take it? PEP must be started within 72 hours (3 days) after a possible exposure to HIV. The sooner you start it, the better; every hour counts. You need to take the PEP medicines every day for 28 days. You will have to see your provider at certain times during and after taking the PEP, so you can have an HIV screening test and other testing. Does PEP cause side effects? Some people taking PEP may have side effects, like nausea. The side effects are usually not serious and often get better over time. If you are taking PEP, tell your provider if you have a side effect that bothers you or that does not go away. PEP medicines may also interact with other medicines that a person is taking (called a drug interaction ). So it's important to tell your provider about any other medicines that you take. Can I take PEP every time I have unprotected sex? PEP is only for emergency situations. It is not the right choice for people who may be exposed to HIV frequently - for example, if you often have sex without a condom with a partner who is HIV-positive. In that case, you should talk to your health care provider about whether PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) would be right for you.

Menopause is the time in a woman's life when her period stops. It is a normal part of aging.  In the years before and during menopause, the levels of female hormones can go up and down. This can cause symptoms such as hot flashes, night sweats, pain during sex, and vaginal dryness. For some women, the symptoms are mild, and they go away on their own. Other women take hormone replacement therapy (HRT), also called menopausal hormone therapy, to relieve these symptoms. HRT may also protect against osteoporosis . HRT is not for everyone. You should not use HRT if you: Think that you are pregnant Have problems with vaginal bleeding Have had certain kinds of cancers Have had a stroke or heart attack Have had blood clots Have liver disease There are different types of HRT. Some have only one hormone, while others have two. Most are pills that you take every day, but there are also skin patches, vaginal creams, gels, and rings. Taking HRT has some risks. For some women, hormone therapy may increase their chances of getting blood clots , heart attacks , strokes , breast cancer , and gallbladder disease . Certain types of HRT have a higher risk, and each woman's own risks can vary, depending upon her medical history and lifestyle. You and your health care provider need to discuss the risks and benefits for you. If you do decide to take HRT, it should be the lowest dose that helps and for the shortest time needed. You should check if you still need to take HRT every 3-6 months. Food and Drug Administration

Medicines treat infectious diseases, prevent problems from chronic diseases, and ease pain. But medicines can also cause harmful reactions if not used correctly. Errors can happen in the hospital, at the health care provider's office, at the pharmacy, or at home.  You can help prevent errors by: Knowing your medicines. When you get a prescription, ask the name of the medicine and check to make sure that the pharmacy gave you the right medicine. Make sure that you understand how often you should take the medicine and how long you should take it. Keeping a list of medicines. Write down all of the medicines that you are taking, including the names of your medicines, how much you take, and when you take them. Make sure to include any over-the-counter medicines , vitamins , supplements , and herbs that you take. List the medicines that you are allergic to or that have caused you problems in the past. Take this list with you every time you see a health care provider. Reading medicine labels and following the directions. Don't just rely on your memory - read the medication label every time.  Be especially careful when giving medicines to children . Asking questions. If you don't know the answers to these questions, ask your health care provider or pharmacist: Why am I taking this medicine? What are the common side effects? What should I do if I have side effects? When should I stop this medicine? Can I take this medicine with the other medicines and supplements on my list? Do I need to avoid certain foods or alcohol while taking this medicine? Food and Drug Administration

Medicines can treat diseases and improve your health. If you are like most people, you need to take medicine at some point in your life. You may need to take medicine every day, or you may only need to take medicine once in a while.  Either way, you want to make sure that your medicines are safe, and that they will help you get better. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration is in charge of ensuring that your prescription and over-the-counter medicines are safe and effective. There are always risks to taking medicines. It is important to think about these risks before you take a medicine. Even safe medicines can cause unwanted side effects or interactions with food, alcohol, or other medicines you may be taking. Some medicines may not be safe during pregnancy . To reduce the risk of reactions and make sure that you get better, it is important for you to take your medicines correctly . You should also be careful when giving medicines to children , since they can be more vulnerable to the effects of medicines.

Children aren't just small adults. It is especially important to remember this when giving medicines to children. Giving a child the wrong dose or a medicine that is not for children can have serious side effects. The drug labels for prescription medicines have a section on "Pediatric Use." It says whether the medicine has been studied for its effects on children. It also tells you which age groups were studied. Some over-the-counter (OTC) medicines , like those that treat fever and pain, have been studied for effectiveness, safety, or dosing in children.  But many other OTC medicines have not. It is important to read the labels carefully, to make sure that the medicine is right for your child. Here are some other tips for giving medicine safely to your child: Read and follow the label directions every time. Pay special attention to usage directions and warnings. Watch out for problems. Contact your health care provider or pharmacist right away if You notice any new symptoms or unexpected side effects in your child The medicine doesn't appear to be working when you expect it to. For example, antibiotics may take a few days to start working, but a pain reliever usually starts working soon after your child takes it. Know the abbreviations for the amounts of medicines: Tablespoon (tbsp.) Teaspoon (tsp.) Milligram (mg.) Milliliter (mL.) Ounce (oz.) Use the correct dosing device. If the label says two teaspoons and you're using a dosing cup with ounces only, don't try to guess how many teaspoons it would be. Get the proper measuring device. Don't substitute another item, such as a kitchen spoon. Check with your health care provider or pharmacist before giving two medicines at the same time. That way, you can avoid a possible overdose or an unwanted interaction. Follow age and weight limit recommendations. If the label says don't give to children under a certain age or weight, then don't do it. Always use the child-resistant cap and re-lock the cap after each use. Also, keep all medicines out of the reach of children. Ask your health care provider or pharmacist if you have any questions. Food and Drug Administration

Over-the-counter (OTC) medicines are drugs you can buy without a prescription. Some OTC medicines relieve aches, pains, and itches. Some prevent or cure diseases, like tooth decay and athlete's foot. Others help manage recurring problems, like migraines and allergies. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration decides whether a medicine is safe and effective enough to sell over-the-counter. This allows you to take a more active role in your health care. But you also need to be careful to avoid mistakes . Make sure to follow the instructions on the drug label. If you don't understand the instructions, ask your pharmacist or health care provider. Also keep in mind that that there are still risks to taking OTC medicines: The medicine you are taking could interact with other medicines, supplements, foods, or drinks Some medicines are not right for people with certain medical conditions. For example, people with high blood pressure should not take certain decongestants. Some people are allergic to certain medicines Many medicines are not safe during pregnancy . If you are pregnant, check with your health care provider before taking any medicine. Be careful when giving medicines to children . Make sure that you give your child the correct dose. If you are giving your child a liquid medicine, don't use a kitchen spoon. Instead use a measuring spoon or a dosing cup marked in teaspoons. If you have been taking an OTC medicine but your symptoms don't go away, contact your health care provider. You should not take OTC medicines longer or in higher doses than the label recommends. Food and Drug Administration

Pain relievers are medicines that reduce or relieve headaches, sore muscles, arthritis, or other aches and pains .  There are many different pain medicines, and each one has advantages and risks. Some types of pain respond better to certain medicines than others. Each person may also have a slightly different response to a pain reliever. Over-the-counter (OTC) medicines are good for many types of pain. There are two main types of OTC pain medicines: acetaminophen (Tylenol) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Aspirin, naproxen (Aleve), and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) are examples of OTC NSAIDs. If OTC medicines don't relieve your pain, your doctor may prescribe something stronger. Many NSAIDs are also available at higher prescription doses. The most powerful pain relievers are opioids . They are very effective, but they can sometimes have serious side effects. There is also a risk of addiction . Because of the risks, you must use them only under a doctor's supervision. There are many things you can do to help ease pain. Pain relievers are just one part of a pain treatment plan.

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that that's found in all the cells in your body. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly.  But if you have too much of it in your blood, it can stick to the walls of your arteries and narrow or even block them. This puts you at risk for coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . Cholesterol is made by your liver. It travels through the blood on proteins called lipoproteins. One type of lipoprotein, LDL , is sometimes called the "bad" cholesterol. A high LDL level leads to a buildup of cholesterol in your arteries. Another type, HDL , is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol. It carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Then your liver removes the cholesterol from your body. What are statins? Statins are a type of cholesterol medicine . Your health care provider may prescribe them if you have high cholesterol and making lifestyle changes does not lower your cholesterol enough. Statins are the most common medicines used to treat high cholesterol. How do statins lower cholesterol? Statins lower LDL cholesterol by slowing down how much cholesterol the liver makes. They also increase your liver's ability to remove LDL cholesterol that is already in the blood. This can slow the formation of plaques in your arteries. Studies have shown that statins lower the risk of heart attack and stroke in people with high LDL cholesterol. Statins can lower your triglyceride level as well. Triglycerides are another type of fat in your blood that can raise the risk of heart disease. Statins may also increase your HDL cholesterol. What are the risks of taking statins? Statins usually don't cause side effects , but they may raise the risk of type 2 diabetes . However, this mainly happens in people already at high risk of diabetes, such as those who are overweight or have obesity , prediabetes , or metabolic syndrome . Statins may also cause abnormal results on liver enzymes tests, but actual liver damage is very rare. Another uncommon side effect is muscle damage. In rare cases, this muscle damage can lead to muscle pain and kidney damage. You should not take statins if you are pregnant or breastfeeding . They are also not recommended for people who have certain types of liver disease . How can I safely take statins? To safely take statins, you should: Take your statin as prescribed. You should not stop taking this medicine on your own, since that can lead to a serious problem or, in rare cases, even cause death. Talk to your provider if you have any concerns about your statin or if you would like to stop or change to a different treatment. Ask your provider which other medicines, supplements , or foods you should avoid. Some of these can interact with statins and cause serious side effects or make statins less effective. For example, grapefruit (fresh or as juice) affects how your liver breaks down some statins. Tell your provider about any symptoms or side effects you are having. Sometimes, people report muscle problems while taking statins. If you start having muscle pain, your provider may order a blood test to look look for muscle damage. The pain may go away if you switch to a different statin. Muscle damage with statins is rare, and your muscles may heal when you switch to a different medicine.

You may have heard of anabolic steroids , which can have harmful effects. But there's another type of steroid - sometimes called a corticosteroid - that treats a variety of problems. These steroids are similar to hormones that your adrenal glands make to fight stress associated with illnesses and injuries. They reduce inflammation and affect the immune system. You may need to take corticosteroids to treat: Arthritis Asthma Autoimmune diseases such as lupus and multiple sclerosis Skin conditions such as eczema and rashes Some kinds of cancer Steroids are strong medicines, and they can have side effects, including weakened bones and cataracts. Because of this, you usually take them for as short a time as possible.

After any operation , you'll have some side effects. There is usually some pain with surgery. There may also be swelling and soreness around the area that the surgeon cut.   Your surgeon can tell you which side effects to expect. There can also be complications. These are unplanned events linked to the operation. Some complications are infection, too much bleeding, reaction to anesthesia , or accidental injury. Some people have a greater risk of complications because of other medical conditions. Your surgeon can tell you how you might feel and what you will be able to do - or not do - the first few days, weeks, or months after surgery. Some other questions to ask are: How long you will be in the hospital What kind of supplies, equipment, and help you might need when you go home When you can go back to work When it is ok to start exercising again Are they any other restrictions in your activities Following your surgeon's advice can help you recover as soon as possible. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

What is anesthesia? Anesthesia is the use of medicines to prevent pain during surgery and other procedures. These medicines are called anesthetics. They may be given by injection, inhalation, topical lotion, spray, eye drops, or skin patch. They cause you to have a loss of feeling or awareness. What is anesthesia used for? Anesthesia may be used in minor procedures, such as filling a tooth. It could be used during childbirth or procedures such as colonoscopies . And it is used during minor and major surgeries. In some cases, a dentist, nurse, or doctor may give you an anesthetic. In other cases, you may need an anesthesiologist. This is a doctor who specializes in giving anesthesia. What are the types of anesthesia? There are several different types of anesthesia: Local anesthesia numbs a small part of the body. It might be used on a tooth that needs to be pulled or on a small area around a wound that needs stitches.  You are awake and alert during local anesthesia. Regional anesthesia is used for larger areas of the body such as an arm, a leg, or everything below the waist. You may be awake during the procedure, or you may be given sedation. Regional anesthesia may be used during childbirth, a Cesarean delivery (C-section), or minor surgeries. General anesthesia affects the whole body. It makes you unconscious and unable to move. It is used during major surgeries, such as heart surgery , brain surgery, back surgery, and organ transplants . What are the risks of anesthesia? Anesthesia is generally safe. But there can be risks, especially with general anesthesia, including: Heart rhythm or breathing problems An allergic reaction to the anesthesia Delirium after general anesthesia. Delirium makes people confused. They may be unclear about what is happening to them. Some people over the age of 60 have delirium for several days after surgery. It can also happen to children when they first wake up from anesthesia. Awareness when someone is under general anesthesia. This usually means that the person hears sounds. But sometimes they can feel pain. This is rare.

What is angioplasty? Angioplasty is a procedure to improve blood flow in coronary arteries that have become narrow or blocked. Your coronary arteries supply oxygen-rich blood to the heart. If you have coronary artery disease , a sticky material called plaque builds up in the coronary arteries. Plaque is made of cholesterol , calcium, and other substances in your blood. Over time, it can narrow your arteries or fully block them. When this happens, some parts of your heart don't get enough blood. Angioplasty widens the blocked part of the artery so more blood can get through. It is also called percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). What conditions does angioplasty treat? Doctors use angioplasty to: Reduce chest pain from blockages in the coronary arteries. This type of pain is called angina . There are different types of angina. Angioplasty treats certain types. Limit damage to the heart during or right after a heart attack . In this case, angioplasty is an emergency treatment. Angioplasty does not cure coronary artery disease. To help prevent more plaque blockages , you'll need to take any prescribed medicines, eat healthy foods, and get regular exercise . What happens during angioplasty? Most people have angioplasties in a hospital in a special room called a cardiac catheterization, or cath, lab. You will be awake and lying down. You'll get medicine to help you relax through an intravenous (IV) line. This is a small tube that goes into a vein in your hand or arm. Angioplasty is done through a blood vessel in your arm, wrist, or groin. Your doctor will: Make a small opening in that area to insert a thin tube (a catheter) into a blood vessel. Thread the tube through the vessel to your heart, using x-rays as a guide. Inject contrast dye inside your arteries. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the x-rays. Replace the first tube with another one that has a small, deflated balloon on the end. Guide the balloon inside the blockage and inflate it to push the plaque flat against the artery wall. This makes the artery wider and improves blood flow. Sometimes put a small, mesh tube into the artery to help keep it open. The tube is called a stent. Some stents have a coating of medicine that helps prevent blood clots from forming. What happens after an angioplasty? If you had an angioplasty for chest pain, you'll go to a recovery room for a few hours. You may stay in the hospital overnight. Your doctor will probably prescribe medicines to prevent blood clots . Most people can return to their usual activities after a week. If you had an emergency angioplasty for a heart attack, you'll need to stay in the hospital for about a few more days. Are there any risks from angioplasty? Angioplasty is very safe. You may get a bruise , feel sore, or have some bleeding where the tubes were inserted. More serious problems don't happen very often, but they are possible. They can include serious bleeding , blood clots, and narrowing of the artery again. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

People can lose all or part of an arm or leg for a number of reasons. Common ones include: Circulation problems from atherosclerosis or diabetes. They may cause you to need an amputation . Traumatic injuries, including from traffic accidents and military combat Cancer Birth defects If you are missing an arm or leg, an artificial limb can sometimes replace it.  The device, which is called a prosthesis, can help you to perform daily activities such as walking, eating, or dressing. Some artificial limbs let you function nearly as well as before.

If you have a disability or injury, you may use a number of assistive devices. These are tools, products or types of equipment that help you perform tasks and activities. They may help you move around, see, communicate, eat, or get dressed. Some are high-tech tools, such as computers. Others are much simpler, like a "reacher" - a tool that helps you grab an object you can't reach.

If you need a mastectomy , you have a choice about whether or not to have surgery to rebuild the shape of the breast. Instead of breast reconstruction, you could choose to wear a breast form that replaces the breast, wear padding inside your bra, or do nothing. All of these options have pros and cons. What is right for one woman may not be right for another. Breast reconstruction may be done at the same time as the mastectomy, or it may be done later on. If radiation therapy is part of the treatment plan, your doctor may suggest waiting until after radiation therapy. If you're thinking about breast reconstruction, talk to a plastic surgeon before the mastectomy, even if you plan to have your reconstruction later on. A surgeon can reconstruct the breast in many ways. Some women choose to have breast implants, which are filled with saline or silicone gel. Another method uses tissue taken from another part of your body. The plastic surgeon can take skin, muscle, and fat from your lower abdomen, back, or buttocks. The type of reconstruction that is best for you depends on your age, body type, and the type of cancer surgery that you had. A plastic surgeon can help you decide. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Cardiac rehabilitation (rehab) is a medically supervised program to help people who have: A heart attack Angioplasty or coronary artery bypass grafting for coronary heart disease A heart valve repair or replacement A heart transplant or a lung transplant Angina Heart failure The goal is to help you return to an active life, and to reduce the risk of further heart problems.  A team of specialists will create a plan for you that includes exercise training, education on heart healthy living, and counseling to reduce stress.  You will learn how to reduce your risk factors, such as high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, depression, and diabetes. Being overweight, having obesity, smoking, and not exercising are other risk factors. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

In coronary artery disease (CAD), the arteries that supply blood and oxygen to your heart muscle grow hardened and narrowed. You may try treatments such as lifestyle changes, medicines, and angioplasty , a procedure to open the arteries.  If these treatments don't help, you may need coronary artery bypass surgery. The surgery creates a new path for blood to flow to the heart.  The surgeon takes a healthy piece of vein from the leg or artery from the chest or wrist.  Then the surgeon attaches it to the coronary artery, just above and below the narrowed area or blockage. This allows blood to bypass (get around) the blockage. Sometimes people need more than one bypass. The results of the surgery usually are excellent. Many people remain symptom-free for many years. You may need surgery again if blockages form in the grafted arteries or veins or in arteries that weren't blocked before.  Lifestyle changes and medicines may help prevent arteries from becoming clogged again. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is critical care? Critical care is medical care for people who have life-threatening injuries and illnesses. It usually takes place in an intensive care unit (ICU). A team of specially-trained health care providers gives you 24-hour care. This includes using machines to constantly monitor your vital signs . It also usually involves giving you specialized treatments. Who needs critical care? You need critical care if you have a life-threatening illness or injury, such as: Severe burns COVID-19 Heart attack Heart failure Kidney failure People recovering from certain major surgeries Respiratory failure Sepsis Severe bleeding Serious infections Serious injuries , such as from car crashes, falls , and shootings Shock Stroke What happens in a critical care unit? In a critical care unit, health care providers use lots of different equipment, including: Catheters, flexible tubes used to get fluids into the body or to drain fluids from the body Dialysis machines ("artificial kidneys") for people with kidney failure Feeding tubes, which give you nutritional support Intravenous (IV) tubes to give you fluids and medicines Machines which check your vital signs and display them on monitors Oxygen therapy to give you extra oxygen to breathe in Tracheostomy tubes, which are breathing tubes. The tube is placed in a surgically made hole that goes through the front of the neck and into the windpipe. Ventilators (breathing machines), which move air in and out of your lungs. This is for people who have respiratory failure. These machines can help keep you alive, but many of them can also raise your risk of infection. Sometimes people in a critical care unit are not able to communicate. It's important that you have an advance directive in place. This can help your health care providers and family members make important decisions, including end-of-life decisions , if you are not able to make them.

Endoscopy is a procedure that lets your doctor look inside your body. It uses an instrument called an endoscope, or scope for short.  Scopes have a tiny camera attached to a long, thin tube. The doctor moves it through a body passageway or opening to see inside an organ. Sometimes scopes are used for surgery, such as for removing polyps from the colon. There are many different kinds of endoscopy. Here are the names of some of them and where they look.: Arthroscopy: joints Bronchoscopy: lungs Colonoscopy and sigmoidoscopy: large intestine Cystoscopy and ureteroscopy: urinary system Laparoscopy : abdomen or pelvis Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy: esophagus and stomach

What is heart surgery? Heart surgery can correct certain heart problems when other treatments haven't worked or can't be used. In some cases, heart surgery may be a medical emergency. For example, surgery for a severe heart attack may need to be done right away. In other cases, you can plan heart surgery ahead of time. Some heart surgeries are major operations, such as heart bypass surgery for blocked arteries in the heart. Other surgeries are more minor heart procedures, such as putting in a pacemaker. What conditions does heart surgery treat? There are different types of heart surgery that can help treat many heart conditions: What conditions does heart surgery treat? What does the heart surgery do? Coronary artery disease (CAD) - when a sticky substance called plaque narrows or blocks the arteries that supply blood to your heart muscle. Makes a new path for blood to flow around the blocked part of an artery in the heart. This is called a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) , or heart bypass. It's the most common heart surgery in adults. Heart valve diseases - problems with the valves that control the flow of blood through your heart. Repairs heart valves. Replaces heart valves with a mechanical valve or a biologic valve made from pig, cow, or human heart tissue. Arrhythmia - problems with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. They are caused by changes in the electrical signals that control your heartbeat. Places a pacemaker or an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in the chest to correct your heartbeat. Treats atrial fibrillation with small cuts in the heart muscle. The cuts form scars that make a path for the heart's electrical signals (Maze surgery). Heart failure - when your heart is too weak or stiff to pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet your body's needs. Places a device in the chest which may include: An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) to help prevent sudden cardiac arrest . A biventricular pacemaker to coordinate the heart's pumping action so it's more powerful. A ventricular assist device to help the heart pump blood. A total artificial heart to pump blood for the heart. Replaces a seriously diseased heart with a heathy heart ( heart transplantation ). Heart aneurysm - a balloon-like bulge in the wall of an artery. It can be life-threatening if the aneurysm tears or bursts. Repairs or replaces the weak part of a heart artery using a patch or a tube made of fabric. Angina - chest pain from coronary artery disease. Uses a laser to make small channels through part of the heart muscle (transmyocardial laser revascularization). Damaged and abnormal heart structures, including congenital heart defects - heart structure problems that you're born with. Repairs heart damage or problems with how the heart and blood vessels are formed. Repairs depend on the type of defect or damage. What approaches do surgeons use to do heart surgery? The approach a surgeon uses to do heart surgery depends on your heart problem, your general health, and other factors. Approaches to heart surgery include: Open-heart surgery (also called traditional heart surgery) is when the surgeon cuts the chest open to reach the heart. Because it's difficult to operate on a beating heart, medicines are used to stop the heart. A heart-lung bypass machine keeps oxygen-rich blood pumping through the body during the surgery. Off-pump heart surgery is open-heart surgery on a beating heart without using a heart-lung bypass machine. The surgeon holds the heart steady with a device. Surgeons may use off-pump heart surgery to do coronary artery bypass grafts (CABG), but only in certain cases. Minimally invasive heart surgery uses small cuts between the ribs. The cuts may be as small as 2 to 3 inches. The surgeon inserts tools into the chest through the cuts. This type of heart surgery may or may not use a heart-lung bypass machine. Robotic-assisted surgery is a type of minimally invasive surgery. The surgeon uses a computer to control tools on the arms of a robot. This allows the surgeon to be very accurate when doing difficult operations. What are the risks of heart surgery? Like all surgery, heart surgery has risks even though the results are often excellent. The risks include: Bleeding Infection, fever , and swelling A problem from anesthesia (medicine that makes you sleep during surgery) Arrhythmia Damage to the heart, kidneys, liver, and lungs Stroke The risks of heart surgery tend to be higher if: The surgery is an emergency. You have other medical conditions, including: Diabetes Kidney diseases Lung diseases Peripheral artery disease (PAD) NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Hip replacement is surgery for people with severe hip damage. The most common cause of damage is osteoarthritis . Osteoarthritis causes pain, swelling, and reduced motion in your joints. It can interfere with your daily activities. If other treatments such as physical therapy, pain medicines, and exercise haven't helped, hip replacement surgery might be an option for you. During a hip replacement operation, the surgeon removes damaged cartilage and bone from your hip joint and replaces them with new, man-made parts. A hip replacement can: Relieve pain Help your hip joint work better Improve walking and other movements The most common problem after surgery is hip dislocation. Because a man-made hip is smaller than the original joint, the ball can come out of its socket. The surgery can also cause blood clots and infections. With a hip replacement, you might need to avoid certain activities, such as jogging and high-impact sports. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases

A hysterectomy is surgery to remove a woman's uterus or womb. The uterus is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant.  After a hysterectomy, you no longer have menstrual periods and can't become pregnant.  Sometimes the surgery also removes the ovaries and fallopian tubes. If you have both ovaries taken out, you will enter menopause . Your health care provider might recommend a hysterectomy if you have: Fibroids Endometriosis that hasn't been cured by medicine or surgery Uterine prolapse -  when the uterus drops into the vagina Cancer of the uterine , cervix , or ovaries Vaginal bleeding that persists despite treatment Chronic pelvic pain , as a last resort Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is knee replacement surgery? Knee replacement surgery is a surgery to replace parts of your knee joint with new, artificial parts. You may need a knee replacement if you have knee damage that causes severe pain and difficulty doing daily activities, such as walking and climbing stairs. It is usually done when other treatments for knee pain haven't helped enough. The goal of a knee replacement is to relieve pain and help you move better. People of all ages may have knee replacement surgery. But it is more common in older people. The decision whether to have surgery is based on your overall health and how much your knee bothers you. What conditions does knee replacement surgery treat? Knee replacement surgery treats conditions that cause the cartilage of the knee joint to wear away. These include: Knee osteoarthritis . This is the most common reason for knee replacement surgery. It usually develops over time after an injury or with aging. Knee damage from other types of arthritis . Problems from knee joints that aren't formed correctly . What happens during knee replacement surgery? During the surgery, a surgeon removes damaged cartilage and some bone from the surfaces of your knee joint. Cartilage is tissue that covers your bones where they meet. Healthy cartilage is smooth and helps the bones glide over each other when you move. When cartilage becomes rough and wears away, the bones rub against each other, causing pain. After removing the damaged knee cartilage and bone, the surgeon attaches the artificial parts to your bones. The artificial parts are made of metal and plastic. They will give your knee new, smooth surfaces. Knee replacement surgery may replace all the damaged parts of your knee (total knee replacement) or just part of your knee (partial knee replacement). In a total knee replacement, the surgeon replaces 3 surfaces: The end of the shinbone The end of the thighbone The back of the kneecap What happens after knee replacement surgery? Some people go home the same day they have surgery. Other people will stay in the hospital a few days. To help prevent blood clots , you'll most likely take blood thinners and wear special socks or coverings on your legs for a short time after surgery. The success of your surgery depends a lot on what you do at home to help yourself recover. A physical therapist will teach you exercises to make your knee stronger and help it bend. It is important to do these exercises regularly. You may need to use a cane or walker for several weeks after the surgery. It will probably also be several weeks before you can drive. Your doctor will tell you when you can start driving again. Most people who follow their recovery instructions can get back to nearly all of their normal daily activities within 3 to 6 weeks after surgery. What is life like after a knee replacement? After recovering from surgery, most people can move better with less pain than before surgery. But having an artificial knee is not the same as having a normal, healthy knee. You need to protect your new knee by: Staying at a healthy weight . Getting regular physical activity . Not doing any high-impact activities, such as jogging, running, and jumping. Instead, you can try low-impact activities that are good for your knee, such as walking, biking, and swimming What are the risks of knee replacement surgery? The chance of having problems after knee replacement surgery is low. But there are risks after any surgery. Possible problems after knee replacement surgery include: Infection Blood clots Heart attack Stroke Nerve damage Scarring that limits how far you can bend your knee Your age, general health, and how active you are can all affect your risk of having a problem after knee replacement surgery. How long does a knee replacement last? A knee replacement doesn't last forever. After 15 to 20 years, the artificial knee parts may become loose or worn. If that happens, you may need another surgery on the same knee. If you're thinking about having knee replacement surgery, talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits. Together you can decide if a knee replacement is right for you.

For many people, laser eye surgery can correct their vision so they no longer need 
glasses or contact lenses.  Laser eye surgery reshapes the cornea, the clear front part of 
the eye.  This changes its focusing power. There are different types of laser eye surgery.  LASIK - laser-assisted in situ 
keratomileusis - is one of the most common. Many patients who have LASIK end up with 20/20 
vision. But, like all medical procedures, it has both risks and benefits.  Only your eye 
doctor can tell if you are a good candidate for laser eye surgery.

A mastectomy is surgery to remove a breast or part of a breast. It is usually done to treat breast cancer .  Types of breast surgery include: Total (simple) mastectomy - removal of breast tissue and nipple Modified radical mastectomy - removal of the breast, most of the lymph nodes under the arm, and often the lining over the chest muscles Lumpectomy - surgery to remove the tumor and a small amount of normal tissue around it Which surgery you have depends on the stage of cancer, size of the tumor, size of the breast, and whether the lymph nodes are involved. Many women have breast reconstruction to rebuild the breast after a mastectomy. Sometimes mastectomy is done to prevent breast cancer. Only high-risk patients have this type of surgery. NIH: National Cancer Institute

An ostomy is surgery to create an opening (stoma) from an area inside the body to the outside. It treats certain diseases of the digestive or urinary systems. It can be permanent, when an organ must be removed.  It can be temporary, when the organ needs time to heal.  The organ could be the small intestine, colon, rectum, or bladder. With an ostomy, there must be a new way for wastes to leave the body. There are many different types of ostomy. Some examples are: Ileostomy - the bottom of the small intestine (ileum) is attached to the stoma. This bypasses the colon, rectum and anus. Colostomy - the colon is attached to the stoma. This bypasses the rectum and the anus. Urostomy - the tubes that carry urine to the bladder are attached to the stoma. This bypasses the bladder. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is oxygen? Oxygen is a gas that your body needs to work properly. Your cells need oxygen to make energy. Your lungs absorb oxygen from the air you breathe. The oxygen enters your blood from your lungs and travels to your organs and body tissues. Certain medical conditions can cause your blood oxygen levels to be too low. Low blood oxygen may make you feel short of breath , tired, and confused. It can also damage your body. Oxygen therapy can help you get more oxygen. What is oxygen therapy? Oxygen therapy is a treatment that provides you with extra oxygen to breathe in. It is also called supplemental oxygen. It is only available through a prescription from your health care provider. You may get it in the hospital, another medical setting, or at home. Some people only need it for a short period of time. Others will need long-term oxygen therapy. There are different types of devices that can give you oxygen. Some use tanks of liquid or gas oxygen. Others use an oxygen concentrator, which pulls oxygen out of the air. You will get the oxygen through a nose tube (cannula), a mask, or a tent. The extra oxygen is breathed in along with normal air. There are portable versions of the tanks and oxygen concentrators. They can make it easier for you to move around while using your therapy. Who needs oxygen therapy? You may need oxygen therapy if you have a condition that causes low blood oxygen, such as: COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) Pneumonia COVID-19 A severe asthma attack Late-stage heart failure Cystic fibrosis Sleep apnea What are the risks of using oxygen therapy? Oxygen therapy is generally safe, but it can cause side effects. They include a dry or bloody nose, tiredness, and morning headaches. Oxygen poses a fire risk, so you should never smoke or use flammable materials when using oxygen. If you use oxygen tanks, make sure your tank is secured and stays upright. If it falls and cracks or the top breaks off, the tank can fly like a missile. What is hyperbaric oxygen therapy? Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) is a different type of oxygen therapy. It involves breathing oxygen in a pressurized chamber or tube. That allows your lungs to gather up to three times more oxygen than you would get by breathing oxygen at normal air pressure. The extra oxygen moves through your blood and to your organs and body tissues. HBOT is used to treat certain serious wounds , burns , injuries, and infections. It also treats air or gas embolisms (bubbles of air in your bloodstream), decompression sickness suffered by divers, and carbon monoxide poisoning . But some treatment centers claim that HBOT can treat almost anything, including Alzheimer's disease , autism , cancer , and Lyme disease . The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not cleared or approved the use of HBOT for these conditions. There are risks to using HBOT, so always check with your provider before you try it.

Surgeons can reshape the appearance of body parts through cosmetic surgery.  Some of the most common body parts people want to improve through surgery include: Breasts: Increase or reduce the size of breasts or reshape sagging breasts Ears: Reduce the size of large ears or set protruding ears back closer to the head Eyes: Correct drooping upper eyelids or remove puffy bags below the eyes Face: Remove facial wrinkles, creases or acne scars Hair: Fill in balding areas with one's own hair Nose: Change the shape of the nose Tummy:  Flatten the abdomen

What is pulmonary rehabilitation? Pulmonary rehabilitation, also known as pulmonary rehab or PR, is a program for people who have chronic (ongoing) breathing problems . It can help improve your ability to function and quality of life. PR does not replace your medical treatment. Instead, you use them together. PR is often an outpatient program that you do in a hospital or clinic. Some people have PR in their homes. You work with a team of health care providers to find ways to lessen your symptoms, increase your ability to exercise, and make it easier to do your daily activities. Who needs pulmonary rehabilitation? Your health care provider may recommend pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) if you have a chronic lung disease or another condition that makes it hard for you to breathe and limits your activities. For example, PR may help you if you: Have COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). The two main types are emphysema and chronic bronchitis . In COPD, your airways (tubes that carry air in and out of your lungs) are partially blocked. This makes it hard to get air in and out. Have an interstitial lung disease such as sarcoidosis and pulmonary fibrosis . These diseases cause scarring of the lungs over time. This makes it hard to get enough oxygen. Have cystic fibrosis (CF). CF is an inherited disease that causes thick, sticky mucus to collect in the lungs and block the airways. Need lung surgery. You may have PR before and after lung surgery to help you prepare for and recover from the surgery. Have a muscle-wasting disorder that affects the muscles used for breathing. An example is muscular dystrophy . PR works best if you start it before your disease is severe. However, even people who have advanced lung disease can benefit from PR. What does pulmonary rehabilitation include? When you first start pulmonary rehabilitation (PR), your team of health care providers will want to learn more about your health. You will have lung function, exercise, and possibly blood tests. Your team will go over your medical history and current treatments. They may check on your mental health and ask about your diet. Then they will work together to create a plan that is right for you. It may include: Exercise training. Your team will come up with an exercise plan to improve your endurance and muscle strength. You will likely have exercises for both your arms and legs. You might use a treadmill, stationary bike, or weights. You may need to start slowly and increase your exercise as you get stronger. Nutritional counseling. Being either overweight or underweight can affect your breathing. A nutritious eating plan can help you work towards a healthy weight. Education about your disease and how to manage it. This includes learning how to avoid situations that make your symptoms worse, how to avoid infections, and how/when to take your medicines. Techniques you can use to save your energy. Your team may teach you easier ways to do daily tasks. For example, you may learn ways to avoid reaching, lifting, or bending. Those movements make it harder to breathe, since they use up energy and make you tighten your abdominal muscles. You may also learn how to better deal with stress , since stress can also take up energy and affect your breathing. Breathing strategies. You will learn techniques to improve your breathing. These techniques may increase your oxygen levels, decrease how often you take breaths, and keep your airways open longer. Psychological counseling and/or group support. It can feel scary to have trouble breathing. If you have a chronic lung disease, you are more likely to have depression , anxiety , or other emotional problems. Many PR programs include counseling and/or support groups. If not, your PR team may be able to refer you to an organization that offers them. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment. It uses high doses of radiation to kill cancer cells and stop them from spreading. About half of all cancer patients receive it. The radiation may be external, from special machines, or internal, from radioactive substances that a doctor places inside your body. The type of radiation therapy you receive depends on many factors, including: The type of cancer The size of the cancer The cancer's location in the body How close the cancer is to normal tissues that are sensitive to radiation How far into the body the radiation needs to travel Your general health and medical history Whether you will have other types of cancer treatment Other factors, such as your age and other medical conditions Radiation therapy can damage normal cells as well as cancer cells. Treatment must be carefully planned to minimize side effects. Common side effects include skin changes and fatigue. Other side effects depend on the part of your body being treated. Sometimes radiation is used with other treatments, like surgery or chemotherapy . NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is rehabilitation? Rehabilitation is care that can help you get back, keep, or improve abilities that you need for daily life. These abilities may be physical, mental, and/or cognitive (thinking and learning). You may have lost them because of a disease or injury, or as a side effect from a medical treatment. Rehabilitation can improve your daily life and functioning. Who needs rehabilitation? Rehabilitation is for people who have lost abilities that they need for daily life. Some of the most common causes include: Injuries and trauma, including burns , fractures (broken bones), traumatic brain injury , and spinal cord injuries Stroke Severe infections Major surgery Side effects from medical treatments, such as from cancer treatments Certain birth defects and genetic disorders Developmental disabilities Chronic pain , including back and neck pain What are the goals of rehabilitation? The overall goal of rehabilitation is to help you get your abilities back and regain independence. But the specific goals are different for each person. They depend on what caused the problem, whether the cause is ongoing or temporary, which abilities you lost, and how severe the problem is. For example,: A person who has had a stroke may need rehabilitation to be able to dress or bathe without help An active person who has had a heart attack may go through cardiac rehabilitation to try to return to exercising Someone with a lung disease may get pulmonary rehabilitation to be able to breathe better and improve their quality of life What happens in a rehabilitation program? When you get rehabilitation, you often have a team of different health care providers helping you. They will work with you to figure out your needs, goals, and treatment plan. The types of treatments that may be in a treatment plan include: Assistive devices , which are tools, equipment, and products that help people with disabilities move and function Cognitive rehabilitation therapy to help you relearn or improve skills such as thinking, learning, memory, planning, and decision making Mental health counseling Music or art therapy to help you express your feelings, improve your thinking, and develop social connections Nutritional counseling Occupational therapy to help you with your daily activities Physical therapy to help your strength, mobility, and fitness Recreational therapy to improve your emotional well-being through arts and crafts, games, relaxation training, and animal-assisted therapy Speech-language therapy to help with speaking, understanding, reading, writing and swallowing Treatment for pain Vocational rehabilitation to help you build skills for going to school or working at a job Depending on your needs, you may have rehabilitation in the providers' offices, a hospital, or an inpatient rehabilitation center. In some cases, a provider may come to your home. If you get care in your home, you will need to have family members or friends who can come and help with your rehabilitation.

A stroke can cause lasting brain damage. People who survive a stroke need to relearn skills they lost because of the damage. Rehabilitation can help them relearn those skills. The effects of a stroke depend on which area of the brain was damaged. The types of disabilities a stroke can cause include: Paralysis or problems controlling movement Pain and other problems with the senses Problems using or understanding language Problems with thinking and memory Emotional disturbances Stroke rehabilitation involves many kinds of health professionals. The goal is to help stroke survivors become as independent as possible and to have the best possible quality of life. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

There are many reasons to have surgery. Some operations can relieve or prevent pain. Others can reduce a symptom of a problem or improve some body function. Some surgeries are done to find a problem. For example, a surgeon may do a biopsy , which involves removing a piece of tissue to examine under a microscope. Some surgeries, like heart surgery , can save your life. Some operations that once needed large incisions (cuts in the body) can now be done using much smaller cuts. This is called laparoscopic surgery. Surgeons insert a thin tube with a camera to see, and use small tools to do the surgery. After surgery there can be a risk of complications, including infection, too much bleeding, reaction to anesthesia , or accidental injury. There is almost always some pain with surgery. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

Weight loss surgery helps people with extreme obesity to lose weight. It may be an option if you cannot lose weight through diet and exercise or have serious health problems caused by obesity. There are different types of weight loss surgery.  They often limit the amount of food you can take in. Some types of surgery also affect how you digest food and absorb nutrients. All types have risks and complications, such as infections, hernias, and blood clots. Many people who have the surgery lose weight quickly, but regain some weight later on.  If you follow diet and exercise recommendations, you can keep most of the weight off. You will also need medical follow-up for the rest of your life. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your abdomen extends from below your chest to your groin. Some people call it the stomach, but your abdomen contains many other important organs. Pain in the abdomen can come from any one of them. The pain may start somewhere else, such as your chest. Severe pain doesn't always mean a serious problem. Nor does mild pain mean a problem is not serious. Call your health care provider if mild pain lasts a week or more or if you have pain with other symptoms. Get medical help immediately if: You have abdominal pain that is sudden and sharp You also have pain in your chest, neck or shoulder You're vomiting blood or have blood in your stool Your abdomen is stiff, hard and tender to touch You can't move your bowels, especially if you're also vomiting

There are many reasons why you might have bad breath.  You can get it if you don't brush and floss regularly. Bacteria that build up in your mouth and between your teeth produce the bad odor. Other problems in your mouth, such as gum disease , dry mouth , or cavities , may also cause it. Sinusitis or problems with your nose may be to blame. You can also have bad breath if you eat some foods, like raw onions, garlic, or cabbage. And of course smoking causes its own bad smell. Some diseases and medicines can cause a specific breath odor. Having good dental habits , like brushing and flossing regularly, help fight bad breath. Mouthwashes, mints or chewing gum may make your breath fresher. If you have a disease that causes the bad breath, treating the disease may help give you fresher breath.

Bleeding is the loss of blood . It can be external, or outside the body, like when you get a cut or wound . It can also be internal, or inside the body, like when you have an injury to an internal organ.  Some bleeding, such as gastrointestinal bleeding , coughing up blood, or vaginal bleeding , can be a symptom of a disease. Normally, when you are injured and start bleeding, a blood clot forms to stop the bleeding quickly. Afterwards, the clot dissolves naturally. To be able to make a clot, your blood needs blood proteins called clotting factors and a type of blood cell called platelets . Some people have a problem with clotting, due to another medical condition or an inherited disease. There are two types of problems: Your blood may not form clots normally, known as a bleeding disorder . This happens when your body does not make enough platelets or clotting factors, or they don't work the way they should. Your blood may make too many clots, or the clots may not dissolve properly Sometimes bleeding can cause other problems. A bruise is bleeding under the skin. Some strokes are caused by bleeding in the brain. Severe bleeding may require first aid or a trip to the emergency room .

When you're short of breath, it's hard or uncomfortable for you to take in the oxygen your body needs. You may feel as if you're not getting enough air. Sometimes you can have mild breathing problems because of a stuffy nose or intense exercise. But shortness of breath can also be a sign of a serious disease. Many conditions can make you feel short of breath: Lung conditions such as asthma , emphysema , or pneumonia Problems with your trachea or bronchi , which are part of your airway system Heart disease can make you feel breathless if your heart cannot pump enough blood to supply oxygen to your body Anxiety and panic attacks Allergies If you often have trouble breathing, it is important to find out the cause.

A bruise is a mark on your skin caused by blood trapped under the surface. It happens when an injury crushes small blood vessels but does not break the skin. Those vessels break open and leak blood under the skin. Bruises are often painful and swollen. You can get skin, muscle and bone bruises. Bone bruises are the most serious. It can take months for a bruise to fade, but most last about two weeks. They start off a reddish color, and then turn bluish-purple and greenish-yellow before returning to normal. To reduce bruising, ice the injured area and elevate it above your heart. See your health care provider if you seem to bruise for no reason, or if the bruise appears to be infected.

Having a pain in your chest can be scary.  It does not always mean that you are having a heart attack .  There can be many other causes, including: Other heart problems, such as angina Panic attacks Digestive problems, such as heartburn or esophagus disorders Sore muscles Lung diseases, such as pneumonia , pleurisy , or pulmonary embolism Costochondritis - an inflammation of joints in your chest Some of these problems can be serious.  Get immediate medical care if you have chest pain that does not go away, crushing pain or pressure in the chest, or chest pain along with nausea, sweating, dizziness or shortness of breath. Treatment depends on the cause of the pain.

Food or small objects can cause choking if they get caught in your throat and block your airway. This keeps oxygen from getting to your lungs and brain. If your brain goes without oxygen for more than four minutes, you could have brain damage or die. Young children are at an especially high risk of choking. They can choke on foods like hot dogs, nuts and grapes, and on small objects like toy pieces and coins. Keep hazards out of their reach and supervise them when they eat. When someone is choking, quick action can be lifesaving. Learn how to do back blows, the Heimlich maneuver (abdominal thrusts), and CPR .

Pain is a signal in your nervous system that something may be wrong.  It is an unpleasant feeling, such as a prick, tingle, sting, burn, or ache. Pain may be sharp or dull. You may feel pain in one area of your body, or all over.  There are two types: acute pain and chronic pain. Acute pain lets you know that you may be injured or a have problem you need to take care of. Chronic pain is different.  The pain may last for weeks, months, or even years. The original cause may have been an injury or infection. There may be an ongoing cause of pain, such as arthritis or cancer. In some cases there is no clear cause. Environmental and psychological factors can make chronic pain worse. Many older adults have chronic pain. Women also report having more chronic pain than men, and they are at a greater risk for many pain conditions. Some people have two or more chronic pain conditions. Chronic pain is not always curable, but treatments can help. There are drug treatments, including pain relievers . There are also non-drug treatments , such as acupuncture , physical therapy, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Constipation means that a person has three or fewer bowel movements in a week. The stool can be hard and dry. Sometimes it is painful to pass. At one time or another, almost 
everyone gets constipated. In most cases, it lasts a short time and is not serious. There are many things you can do to prevent constipation. They include Eating more fruits, vegetables and grains, which are high in fiber Drinking plenty of water and other liquids Getting enough exercise Taking time to have a bowel movement when you need to Using laxatives only if your doctor says you should Asking your doctor if medicines you take may cause constipation It's not important that you have a bowel movement every day. If your bowel habits change, however, check with your doctor. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Coughing is a reflex that keeps your throat and airways clear.  Although it can be annoying, coughing helps your body heal or protect itself. Coughs can be either acute or chronic.  Acute coughs begin suddenly and usually last no more than 2 to 3 weeks.  Acute coughs are the kind you most often get with a cold , flu , or acute bronchitis .  Chronic coughs last longer than 2 to 3 weeks.  Causes of chronic cough include: Chronic bronchitis Asthma Allergies COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease) Smoking Throat disorders , such as croup in young children Some medicines Water can help ease your cough - whether you drink it or add it to the air with a steamy shower or vaporizer. If you have a cold or the flu, antihistamines may work better than non-prescription cough medicines .   Children under four should not have cough medicine.  For children over four, use caution and read labels carefully.

What is dehydration? Dehydration is a condition caused by the loss of too much fluid from the body .  It happens when you are losing more fluids than you are taking in, and your body does not have enough fluids to work properly. What causes dehydration? You can become dehydrated because of: Diarrhea Vomiting Sweating too much Urinating too much, which can happen because of certain medicines and illnesses Fever Not drinking enough water or other fluids Who is more likely to develop dehydration? Certain people are more likely to develop dehydration: Older adults. Some people lose their sense of thirst as they age, so they don't drink enough fluids. Infants and young children, who are more likely to have diarrhea or vomiting People with chronic illnesses that cause them to urinate or sweat more often, such as diabetes , cystic fibrosis , or kidney problems People who take medicines that cause them to urinate or sweat more People who exercise or work outdoors during hot weather What are the symptoms of dehydration? In adults , the symptoms of dehydration include: Feeling very thirsty Dry mouth Urinating and sweating less than usual Dark-colored urine Dry skin Feeling tired Dizziness In infants and young children , the symptoms of dehydration include: Dry mouth and tongue Crying without tears No wet diapers for 3 hours or more A high fever Being unusually sleepy or drowsy Irritability Eyes that look sunken Dehydration can be mild, or it can be severe enough to be life-threatening. Get medical help right away if the symptoms also include: Confusion Fainting Lack of urination Rapid heartbeat Rapid breathing Shock How is dehydration diagnosed? To find out if you dehydration, your health care provider will: Do a physical exam Check your vital signs Ask about your symptoms Your provider may also order tests, such as: Blood tests to check your electrolyte levels, especially potassium and sodium . Electrolytes are minerals in your body that have an electric charge. They have many important jobs, including helping to keep a balance of fluids in your body. Blood tests to check your kidney function . Urine tests to check for dehydration and its cause. What are the treatments for dehydration? The treatment for dehydration is to replace the fluids and electrolytes that you have lost. For mild cases, you may just need to drink lots of water. If you lost electrolytes, sports drinks may help. There are also oral rehydration solutions for children. You can buy those without a prescription. Severe cases may be treated with intravenous (IV) fluids with salt in a hospital. Can dehydration be prevented? The key to preventing dehydration is making sure that you get enough fluids: Drink enough water every day. Each person's needs can be different, so ask your health care provider how much you should be drinking each day. Avoid drinks that have sugar and caffeine . Drink extra fluids when the weather is hot, especially if you are exercising or working outside. If you are losing a lot of minerals in sweat, sports drinks can help you. But some sports drinks have lots of sugar, so be careful not to drink too much of them. Get extra fluids when you are sick. If you are having trouble keeping liquids down, you can try taking small sips of water or sucking on ice chips.

What is diarrhea? Diarrhea is loose, watery stools (bowel movements). You have diarrhea if you have loose stools three or more times in one day. Acute diarrhea is diarrhea that lasts a short time. It is a common problem.  It usually lasts about one or two days, but it may last longer. Then it goes away on its own. Diarrhea lasting more than a few days may be a sign of a more serious problem. Chronic diarrhea -- diarrhea that lasts at least four weeks -- can be a symptom of a chronic disease. Chronic diarrhea symptoms may be continual, or they may come and go. What causes diarrhea? The most common causes of diarrhea include: Bacteria from contaminated food or water Viruses such as the flu , norovirus , or rotavirus . Rotavirus is the most common cause of acute diarrhea in children. Parasites, which are tiny organisms found in contaminated food or water Medicines such as antibiotics, cancer drugs, and antacids that contain magnesium Food intolerances and sensitivities, which are problems digesting certain ingredients or foods. An example is lactose intolerance . Diseases that affect the stomach, small intestine, or colon, such as Crohn's disease Problems with how the colon functions, such as irritable bowel syndrome Some people also get diarrhea after stomach surgery, because sometimes the surgeries can cause food to move through your digestive system more quickly. Sometimes no cause can be found. If your diarrhea goes away within a few days, finding the cause is usually not necessary. Who is at risk for diarrhea? People of all ages can get diarrhea. On average, adults In the United States have acute diarrhea once a year. Young children have it an average of twice a year. People who visit developing countries are at risk for traveler's diarrhea . It is caused by consuming contaminated food or water. What other symptoms might I have with diarrhea? Other possible symptoms of diarrhea include: Cramps or pain in the abdomen An urgent need to use the bathroom Loss of bowel control If a virus or bacteria is the cause of your diarrhea, you may also have a fever, chills, and bloody stools. Diarrhea can cause dehydration , which means that your body does not have enough fluid to work properly. Dehydration can be serious, especially for children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems. When do I need to see a health care provider for diarrhea? Although it is usually not harmful, diarrhea can become dangerous or signal a more serious problem. Contact your health care provider if you have: Signs of dehydration Diarrhea for more than 2 days, if you are an adult. For children, contact the provider if it lasts more than 24 hours. Severe pain in your abdomen or rectum (for adults) A fever of 102 degrees or higher Stools containing blood or pus Stools that are black and tarry If children have diarrhea, parents or caregivers should not hesitate to call a health care provider. Diarrhea can be especially dangerous in newborns and infants. How is the cause of diarrhea diagnosed? To find the cause of diarrhea, your health care provider may: Do a physical exam Ask about any medicines you are taking Test your stool or blood to look for bacteria, parasites, or other signs of disease or infection Ask you to stop eating certain foods to see whether your diarrhea goes away If you have chronic diarrhea, your health care provider may perform other tests to look for signs of disease. What are the treatments for diarrhea? Diarrhea is treated by replacing lost fluids and electrolytes to prevent dehydration. Depending on the cause of the problem, you may need medicines to stop the diarrhea or treat an infection. Adults with diarrhea should drink water, fruit juices, sports drinks, sodas without caffeine, and salty broths. As your symptoms improve, you can eat soft, bland food. Children with diarrhea should be given oral rehydration solutions to replace lost fluids and electrolytes. Can diarrhea be prevented? Two types of diarrhea can be prevented - rotavirus diarrhea and traveler's diarrhea. There are vaccines for rotavirus. They are given to babies in two or three doses. You can help prevent traveler's diarrhea by being careful about what you eat and drink when you are in developing countries: Use only bottled or purified water for drinking, making ice cubes, and brushing your teeth If you do use tap water, boil it or use iodine tablets Make sure that the cooked food you eat is fully cooked and served hot Avoid unwashed or unpeeled raw fruits and vegetables NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

When you're dizzy, you may feel lightheaded, woozy, or disoriented. If you feel like you or the room are spinning, you have vertigo. These feelings may make you lose your balance . Dizziness can have many different causes. A sudden drop in blood pressure or being dehydrated can make you dizzy. Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down. Certain medicines and problems with your inner ear may cause dizziness. So can motion sickness . Sometimes dizziness can be a symptom of other disorders. As people get older, they may have more health problems and take more medicines. This makes them more likely to have problems with dizziness and balance. Dizziness usually gets better by itself or is easily treated. If you are dizzy often, you should see your health care provider to find the cause. NIH: National Institutes of Health

Edema means swelling caused by fluid in your body's tissues. It usually occurs in the feet, ankles and legs, but it can involve your entire body. Causes of edema include: Eating too much salt Sunburn Heart failure Kidney disease Liver problems from cirrhosis Pregnancy Problems with lymph nodes , especially after mastectomy Some medicines Standing or walking a lot when the weather is warm To keep swelling down, your health care provider may recommend keeping your legs raised when sitting, wearing support stockings, limiting how much salt you eat, or taking a medicine called a diuretic - also called a water pill.

Fainting is a temporary loss of consciousness. If you're about to faint, you'll feel dizzy, lightheaded, or nauseous. Your field of vision may "white out" or "black out."  Your skin may be cold and clammy.  You lose muscle control at the same time, and may fall down. Fainting usually happens when your blood pressure drops suddenly, causing a decrease in blood flow to your brain. It is more common in older people. Some causes of fainting include: Heat or dehydration Emotional distress Standing up too quickly Certain medicines Drop in blood sugar Heart problems When someone faints, make sure that the airway is clear and check for breathing. The person should stay lying down for 10-15 minutes.  Most people recover completely. Fainting is usually nothing to worry about, but it can sometimes be a sign of a serious problem. If you faint, it's important to see your health care provider and find out why it happened.

What is fatigue? Fatigue is a feeling of weariness, tiredness, or lack of energy. It can interfere with your usual daily activities. Fatigue can be a normal response to physical activity, emotional stress , boredom, or lack of sleep. But sometimes it can be a sign of a mental or physical condition. If you have been feeling tired for weeks, contact your health care provider. They can help you find out what's causing your fatigue and recommend ways to relieve it. What causes fatigue? Fatigue itself is not a disease; it's a symptom. It can have many different causes, including pregnancy and various medical problems, treatments, and lifestyle habits such as: Medical problems: Chronic (long-lasting) diseases such as diabetes , COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), and heart , liver , kidney and thyroid diseases Untreated pain and diseases like fibromyalgia Anemia Infections Parkinson's disease Sleep apnea and other sleep disorders Recent stroke Mental disorders such as depression and anxiety Treatments: Cancer treatments such as chemotherapy , radiation , and bone marrow transplants Recovering from major surgery Taking certain medicines, such as antidepressants , antihistamines, and medicines for nausea and pain Lifestyle habits: Not getting enough sleep Staying up too late Drinking too much alcohol Substance use Having too much caffeine (which can keep you from getting a good night's sleep) Getting too little or too much exercise Overwhelming fatigue is part of a disorder called myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). The fatigue caused by this disorder is different from a tired feeling that goes away after you rest. Instead, the fatigue in ME/CFS lasts a long time, does not get better with rest, and limits your ability to do ordinary daily activities. What can I do to manage fatigue? If you've had fatigue that does not get better after several weeks, call your provider. They will ask questions about your sleep, daily activities, appetite, and exercise. They will likely do a physical exam and order lab tests. Once they decide on a diagnosis, they can tell you what treatments might help. You can also make some lifestyle changes to feel less tired: Get regular physical activity Improve your sleep habits Stop smoking (if you smoke), since smoking is linked to many diseases that can cause fatigue Manage stress Eat a healthy diet and avoid alcohol It also may be helpful for you to keep a fatigue diary. This can help you find patterns throughout the day, such as when you feel more tired and when you have more energy. It can also help you plan for activities that may give you more energy. NIH: National Institute on Aging

A fever is a body temperature that is higher than normal. A normal temperature can vary from person to person, but it is usually around 98.6 F (37 C). A fever is not a disease. It is usually a sign that your body is trying to fight an illness or infection. Infections cause most fevers. You get a fever because your body is trying to kill the virus or bacteria that caused the infection. Most of those bacteria and viruses do well when your body is at your normal temperature. But if you have a fever, it is harder for them to survive. Fever also activates your body's immune system. Other causes of fevers include: Medicines, including some antibiotics , blood pressure medicines , and anti-seizure medicines Heat illness Cancers Autoimmune diseases Some childhood vaccines Treatment depends on the cause of your fever. If the fever is very high, your health care provider may recommend taking an over-the-counter medicine such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Adults can also take aspirin, but children with fevers should not take aspirin. It is also important to drink enough liquids, to prevent dehydration .

Frostbite is an injury to the body that is caused by freezing. It most often affects the nose, ears, cheeks, chin, fingers, or toes. Frostbite can permanently damage the body, and severe cases can lead to amputation . If you have frostbite, the skin in that area may turn white or grayish-yellow. It may feel firm or waxy when you touch it. The area will also feel numb. If you have symptoms of frostbite, seek medical care. But if immediate medical care isn't available, here are steps to take: Get into a warm room as soon as possible. If possible, do not walk on frostbitten feet or toes. Walking increases the damage. Put the affected area in warm - not hot - water. You can also warm the affected area using body heat. For example, use your armpit to warm frostbitten fingers. Don't rub the frostbitten area with snow or massage it at all. This can cause more damage. Don't use a heating pad, heat lamp, or the heat of a stove, fireplace, or radiator for warming. Since frostbite makes an area numb, you could burn it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Everyone has gas. Most people pass gas 13 to 21 times a day. Passing gas through the mouth is called belching or burping.  Passing gas through the anus is called flatulence. Most of the time gas does not have an odor. The odor comes from bacteria in the large intestine that release small amounts of gases that contain sulfur. Gas in the digestive tract comes from two sources: air that you swallow and the breakdown of undigested food by bacteria in the large intestine.  Certain foods may cause gas.  Foods that produce gas in one person may not cause gas in another. You can reduce the amount of gas you have by: Drinking lots of water and non-fizzy drinks Eating more slowly so you swallow less air when you eat Avoiding milk products if you have lactose intolerance Medicines can help reduce gas or the pain and bloating caused by gas. If your symptoms still bother you, see your health care provider. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your digestive or gastrointestinal (GI) tract includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine or colon, rectum, and anus. Bleeding can come from any of these areas. The amount of bleeding can be so small that only a lab test can find it. Signs of bleeding in the digestive tract depend where it is and how much bleeding there is. Signs of bleeding in the upper digestive tract include: Bright red blood in vomit Vomit that looks like coffee grounds Black or tarry stool Dark blood mixed with stool Signs of bleeding in the lower digestive tract include: Black or tarry stool Dark blood mixed with stool Stool mixed or coated with bright red blood GI bleeding is not a disease, but a symptom of a disease. There are many possible causes of GI bleeding, including hemorrhoids , peptic ulcers , tears or inflammation in the esophagus, diverticulosis and diverticulitis , ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease , colonic polyps , or cancer in the colon , stomach or esophagus . The test used most often to look for the cause of GI bleeding is called endoscopy . It uses a flexible instrument inserted through the mouth or rectum to view the inside of the GI tract. A type of endoscopy called colonoscopy looks at the large intestine. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Almost everyone has had a headache. Headache is the most common form of pain. It's a major reason people miss days at work or school or visit the doctor. The most common type of headache is a tension headache. Tension headaches are due to tight muscles in your shoulders, neck, scalp and jaw. They are often related to stress, depression or anxiety. You are more likely to get tension headaches if you work too much, don't get enough sleep, miss meals, or use alcohol. Other common types of headaches include migraines , cluster headaches, and sinus headaches. Most people can feel much better by making lifestyle changes, learning ways to relax and taking pain relievers . Not all headaches require a doctor's attention. But sometimes headaches warn of a more serious disorder. Let your health care provider know if you have sudden, severe headaches. Get medical help right away if you have a headache after a blow to your head, or if you have a headache along with a stiff neck, fever, confusion, loss of consciousness, or pain in the eye or ear. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Heartburn is a painful burning feeling in your chest or throat. It happens when stomach acid backs up into your esophagus, the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. If you have heartburn more than twice a week, you may have GERD . But you can have GERD without having heartburn. Pregnancy, certain foods, alcohol, and some medications can bring on heartburn. Treating heartburn is important because over time reflux can damage the esophagus. Over-the-counter medicines may help.  If the heartburn continues, you may need prescription medicines or surgery. If you have other symptoms such as crushing chest pain, it could be a heart attack . Get help immediately.

Your body normally cools itself by sweating.  During hot weather, especially when it is very humid, sweating just isn't enough to cool you off. Your body temperature can rise to dangerous levels and you can develop a heat illness. Most heat illnesses happen when you stay out in the heat too long. Exercising and working outside in high heat can also lead to heat illness. Older adults, young children, and those who are sick or overweight are most at risk. Taking certain medicines or drinking alcohol can also raise your risk. Heat-related illnesses include: Heat stroke - a life-threatening illness in which body temperature may rise above 106 F (41 C) in minutes. Symptoms include dry skin, a rapid, strong pulse, dizziness, nausea, and confusion. If you see any of these signs, get medical help right away. Heat exhaustion -  an illness that can happen after several days of exposure to high temperatures and not enough fluids. Symptoms include heavy sweating, rapid breathing, and a fast, weak pulse. If it is not treated, it can turn into heat stroke. Heat cramps - muscle pains or spasms that happen during heavy exercise. You usually get them in your abdomen, arms, or legs. Heat rash - skin irritation from excessive sweating. It is more common in young children. You can lower your risk of heat illness by drinking fluids to prevent dehydration , replacing lost salt and minerals, and limiting your time in the heat. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Hives are red and sometimes itchy bumps on your skin. An allergic reaction to a drug or food usually causes them. Allergic reactions cause your body to release chemicals that can make your skin swell up in hives. People who have other allergies are more likely to get hives than other people.  Other causes include infections  and stress. Hives are very common.  They usually go away on their own, but if you have a serious case, you might need medicine or a shot. In rare cases, hives can cause a dangerous swelling in your airways, making it hard to breathe - which is a medical emergency.

Cold weather can affect your body in different ways. You can get frostbite , which is an injury to the body that is caused by freezing. Your body can also lose heat faster than you can produce it. That can cause hypothermia, or abnormally low body temperature. It can make you sleepy, confused, and clumsy. Because it happens gradually and affects your thinking, you may not realize you need help. That makes it especially dangerous. A body temperature below 95 F (35 C) is a medical emergency and can lead to death if not treated promptly. Anyone who spends much time outdoors in cold weather can get hypothermia. You can also get it from being cold and wet, or under cold water for too long. Babies and old people are especially at risk. Babies can get it from sleeping in a cold room. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Nearly everyone has had indigestion at one time. It's a feeling of discomfort or a burning feeling in your upper abdomen. You may have heartburn or belch and feel bloated. You may also feel nauseated, or even throw up. You might get indigestion from eating too much or too fast, eating high-fat foods, or eating when you're stressed. Smoking, drinking too much alcohol, using some medicines, being tired, and having ongoing stress can also cause indigestion or make it worse. Sometimes the cause is a problem with the digestive tract, like an ulcer or GERD . Avoiding foods and situations that seem to cause it may help. Because indigestion can be a sign of a more serious problem, see your health care provider if it lasts for more than two weeks or if you have severe pain or other symptoms. Your health care provider may use x-rays, lab tests, and an upper endoscopy to diagnose the cause.  You may need medicines to treat the symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is itching? Itching is an irritating sensation that makes you want to scratch your skin. Sometimes it can feel like pain, but it is different. Often, you feel itchy in one area in your body, but sometimes you may feel itching all over. Along with the itching, you may also have a rash or hives . What causes itching? Itching is a symptom of many health conditions. Some common causes are: Allergic reactions to food , insect bites , pollen , and medicines Skin conditions such as eczema , psoriasis , and dry skin Irritating chemicals, cosmetics , and other substances Parasites such as pinworms , scabies , head and body lice Pregnancy Liver , kidney , or thyroid diseases Certain cancers or cancer treatments Diseases that can affect the nervous system, such as diabetes and shingles What are the treatments for itching? Most itching is not serious. To feel better, you could try: Applying cold compresses Using moisturizing lotions Taking lukewarm or oatmeal baths Using over-the-counter hydrocortisone cream or antihistamines Avoiding scratching, wearing irritating fabrics, and exposure to high heat and humidity Contact your health care provider if your itching is severe, does not go away after a few weeks, or does not have an apparent cause. You may need other treatments, such as medicines or light therapy. If you have an underlying disease that is causing the itching, treating that disease may help.

Jaundice causes your skin and the whites of your eyes to turn yellow. Too much bilirubin causes jaundice.  Bilirubin is a yellow chemical in hemoglobin, the substance that carries oxygen in your red blood cells. As red blood cells break down, your body builds new cells to replace them. The old ones are processed by the liver. If the liver cannot handle the blood cells as they break down, bilirubin builds up in the body and your skin may look yellow. Many healthy babies have some jaundice during the first week of life.  It usually goes away.   However, jaundice can happen at any age and may be a sign of a problem.  Jaundice can happen for many reasons, such as: Blood diseases Genetic syndromes Liver diseases, such as hepatitis or cirrhosis Blockage of bile ducts Infections Medicines

Motion sickness is a common problem in people traveling by car, train, airplanes, and 
especially boats. Anyone can get it, but it is more common in children, pregnant women, and people taking certain medicines. Motion sickness can start suddenly, with a queasy feeling and cold sweats. It can then lead to dizziness and nausea and vomiting . Your brain senses movement by getting signals from your inner ears, eyes, muscles, and joints. When it gets signals that do not match, you can get motion sickness. For example, if you are reading on your phone while riding a bus, your eyes are focused on something that is not moving, but your inner ear senses motion. Where you sit can make a difference. The front seat of a car, forward cars of a train, upper deck on a boat or wing seats in a plane may give you a smoother ride. Looking out into the distance - instead of trying to read or look at something in the vehicle - can also help. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are nausea and vomiting? Nausea is when you feel sick to your stomach, as if you are going to throw up. Vomiting is when you throw up. What causes nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting can be symptoms of many different conditions, including: Morning sickness during pregnancy Gastroenteritis (infection of your intestines) and other infections Migraines Motion sickness Food poisoning Medicines, including those for cancer chemotherapy GERD (reflux) and ulcers Intestinal obstruction When do I need to see a health care provider for nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting are common. They are usually not serious. However, you should contact your health care provider immediately if you have: A reason to think that your vomiting is from poisoning Vomited for longer than 24 hours Blood in the vomit Severe abdominal pain Severe headache and stiff neck Signs of dehydration , such as dry mouth, infrequent urination or dark urine How is the cause of nausea and vomiting diagnosed? Your health care provider will take your medical history, ask about your symptoms and do a physical exam. The provider will look for signs of dehydration. You may have some tests, including blood and urine tests. Women may also have a pregnancy test. What are the treatments for nausea and vomiting? Treatments for nausea and vomiting depend on the cause. You may get treatment for the underlying problem. There are some medicines that can treatment nausea and vomiting. For severe cases of vomiting, you may need extra fluids through an IV (intravenous). There are things that you can do to feel better: Get enough fluids, to avoid dehydration. If you are having trouble keeping liquids down, drink small amounts of clear liquids often. Eat bland foods; stay away from spicy, fatty, or salty foods Eat smaller meals more often Avoid strong smells, since they can sometimes trigger nausea and vomiting If you are pregnant and have morning sickness, eat crackers before you get out of bed in the morning

Pain is a signal in your nervous system that something may be wrong. It is an unpleasant feeling, such as a prick, tingle, sting, burn, or ache. Pain may be sharp or dull. It may come and go, or it may be constant. You may feel pain in one area of your body, such as your back , abdomen , chest , pelvis , or you may feel pain all over. Pain can be helpful in diagnosing a problem. If you never felt pain, you might seriously hurt yourself without knowing it, or you might not realize you have a medical problem that needs treatment. There are two types of pain: acute and chronic . Acute pain usually comes on suddenly, because of a disease, injury, or inflammation. It can often be diagnosed and treated. It usually goes away, though sometimes it can turn into chronic pain. Chronic pain lasts for a long time, and can cause severe problems. Pain is not always curable, but there are many ways to treat it. Treatment depends on the cause and type of pain. There are drug treatments, including pain relievers . There are also non-drug treatments , such as acupuncture , physical therapy, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Pelvic pain occurs mostly in the lower abdomen area. The pain might be steady, or it might come and go. It can be a sharp and stabbing pain in a specific spot, or a dull pain that is spread out. If the pain is severe, it might get in the way of your daily activities. If you're a woman, you might feel pain during your period . It could also happen when you have sex. Pelvic pain can be a sign that there is a problem with one of the organs in your pelvic area, such as the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, or vagina. If you're a man, the cause could be problem with the prostate . In men and women, it could be a symptom of infection, or a problem with the urinary tract, lower intestines, rectum, muscle, or bone. Some women have more than one cause of pelvic pain at the same time. You might have to have lab, imaging, or other medical tests to find the cause of the pain. The treatment will depend on the cause, how bad the pain is, and how often it occurs. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

A rare disease is one that affects fewer than 200,000 people in the United States. There are nearly 7,000 rare diseases. More than 25 million Americans have one. Rare diseases: May involve chronic illness, disability, and often premature death Often have no treatment or not very effective treatment Are frequently not diagnosed correctly Are often very complex Are often caused by changes in genes It can be hard to find a specialist who knows how to treat your rare disease.  Disease advocacy groups, rare disease organizations, and genetics clinics may help you to find one. NIH: National Institutes of Health

What is Raynaud phenomenon? Raynaud phenomenon is a condition that affects your blood vessels (the tubes that your blood flows through). It causes your blood vessels to narrow, which decreases blood flow. This is called a Raynaud episode or "attack." The attacks usually affect your fingers and toes, causing them to become cold and numb. They may also change color, usually to white or blue. These attacks happen in response to cold temperatures or stress . Raynaud phenomenon may also be called Raynaud disease or Raynaud syndrome. What are the types of Raynaud phenomenon? There are two types of Raynaud phenomenon: Primary Raynaud phenomenon is the more common type. Its cause is unknown. Secondary Raynaud phenomenon is usually caused by another disease or problem, such as lupus or scleroderma . Other causes may be exposure to cold or certain chemicals. The type can be more serious than the primary type. What causes Raynaud phenomenon? Researchers don't know exactly why some people develop Raynaud phenomenon. But they do understand how the attacks happen. When you are exposed to cold, your body tries to slow the loss of heat and maintain its temperature. To do this, the blood vessels in the top layer of your skin constrict (narrow). This moves blood from those vessels near the surface to vessels deeper in the body. But when you have Raynaud phenomenon, the blood vessels in your hands and feet react to cold or stress by narrowing quickly. They also stay narrowed for a long time. Who is more likely to develop Raynaud phenomenon? Anyone can develop Raynaud phenomenon, but some people are more likely to develop it: Primary Raynaud phenomenon has been linked to: Your sex. Women get it more often than men. Your age. It usually develops in people younger than age 30. It often starts in the teenage years. A family history of Raynaud phenomenon. You are more likely to develop Raynaud phenomenon if you have a family member who has it. Secondary Raynaud phenomenon has been linked to: Certain diseases. These include lupus, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), carpal tunnel syndrome , and connective tissue disorders . Certain medicines. Medicines that treat high blood pressure , migraines , and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may cause similar symptoms to Raynaud phenomenon or make your symptoms worse. Work-related exposures, such as repeated use of vibrating machinery (such as a jackhammer), or exposure to cold or certain chemicals. What are the symptoms of Raynaud phenomenon? Raynaud attacks most often happen when you get cold, for example when you grab something cold from the freezer or go into an air-conditioned building on a warm day. Attacks usually affect your fingers and toes. But sometimes they can affect other parts of your body, such as your ears, nose, lips, or nipples. An attack causes the skin to become cold and numb. Your skin may also turn white or blue due to a lack of oxygen. As the blood flow returns, your skin may tingle, throb, or turn red. An attack may last a few minutes or a few hours. If you have darker skin, you may not be able to easily see the skin color changes. For many people, especially those with the primary type, the symptoms are mild. People with the secondary type often have more severe symptoms. They may develop skin ulcers (open sores caused by poor blood flow) or skin infections . How is Raynaud phenomenon diagnosed? There is no specific test to diagnose Raynaud phenomenon. To find out if you have it, your health care provider: Will take your medical history and ask about your symptoms. Will do a physical exam. May order blood and other lab tests to check for other conditions which could be causing your symptoms and/or to help decide which type of Raynaud phenomenon you have. What are the treatments for Raynaud phenomenon? Most people with Raynaud phenomenon can keep their symptoms under control by avoiding getting cold. But if this is not enough, medicines and, in some cases, surgical procedures can help. Secondary Raynaud phenomenon is more likely to be serious and to need more treatments. It's also important to treat the condition or problem that is causing your Raynaud phenomenon. You may need to see a specialist such as a rheumatologist, a doctor who treats diseases of the joints, muscles, and bones. Can Raynaud phenomenon be prevented? Raynaud phenomenon cannot be prevented, but you can help prevent attacks and manage your symptoms by: Placing your hands or feet in a warm place when you have an attack. This could mean putting them under warm (not hot) water or under a heating pad. Keeping your body, especially your hands and feet, warm in cold weather. Avoiding triggers, such as certain medicines and stress. Quitting smoking (or not starting smoking). Managing stress. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Sciatica is a symptom of a problem with the sciatic nerve, the largest nerve in the body. It controls muscles in the back of your knee and lower leg and provides feeling to the back of your thigh, part of your lower leg, and the sole of your foot. When you have sciatica, you have pain, weakness, numbness, or tingling. It can start in the lower back and extend down your leg to your calf, foot, or even your toes. It's usually on only one side of your body. Causes of sciatica include: A ruptured intervertebral disk Narrowing of the spinal canal that puts pressure on the nerve, called spinal stenosis An injury such as a pelvic fracture. In many cases no cause can be found. Sometimes sciatica goes away on its own. Treatment, if needed, depends on the cause of the problem. It may include exercises, medicines, and surgery.

Many disorders can affect our ability to speak and communicate. They range from saying sounds incorrectly to being completely unable to speak or understand speech.  Causes include: Hearing disorders and deafness Voice problems , such as dysphonia or those caused by cleft lip or palate Speech problems like stuttering Developmental disabilities Learning disabilities Autism spectrum disorder Brain injury Stroke Some speech and communication problems may be genetic. Often, no one knows the causes. By first grade, about 5% of children have noticeable speech disorders. Speech and language therapy can help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

What is stuttering? Stuttering is a speech disorder . It involves interruptions in the flow of speech. These interruptions are called disfluencies. They may involve: Repeating sounds, syllables, or words Stretching out a sound Suddenly stopping in the middle of a syllable or word Sometimes, along with the stuttering, there may be nodding, rapid blinking, or trembling lips. The stuttering may be worse when you are stressed, excited, or tired. Stuttering can be frustrating, because you know exactly what you want to say, but you have trouble saying it. It can make it difficult to communicate with people. This can cause problems with school, work, and relationships. What causes stuttering? There are two main types of stuttering, and they have different causes: Developmental stuttering is the more common type. It starts in young children while they are still learning speech and language skills. Many children stutter when they first start talking. Most of them will outgrow it. But some continue to stutter, and the exact cause is unknown. There are differences in the brains of people who continue to stutter. Genetics may also play a role, since this type of stuttering can run in families. Neurogenic stuttering can happen after someone has a stroke , head trauma , or other type of brain injury . Because of the injury, the brain has trouble coordinating the different parts of the brain involved in speech. Who is at risk for stuttering? Stuttering can affect anyone, but it is much more common in boys than girls. Younger children are most likely to stutter. About 75% of children who stutter will get better. For the rest, stuttering can continue their whole lives. How is stuttering diagnosed? Stuttering is usually diagnosed by a speech-language pathologist. This is a health professional who is trained to test and treat people with voice, speech, and language disorders. If you or your child stutters, your regular health care provider may give you a referral to a speech-language pathologist. Or in some cases, a child's teacher may make a referral. To make a diagnosis, the speech-language pathologist will: Look at the case history, such as when the stuttering was first noticed, how often it happens, and in what situations it happens Listen to you or your child speak and analyze the stuttering Evaluate you or your child's speech and language abilities, including the ability to understand and use language Ask about the impact of stuttering on you or your child's life Ask whether stuttering runs in the family For a child, consider how likely it is that he or she will outgrow it What are the treatments for stuttering? There are different treatments that can help with stuttering. Some of these may help one person but not another. You need to work with the speech-language pathologist to figure out the best plan for you or your child. The plan should take into account how long the stuttering has been going on and whether there are any other speech or language problems. For a child, the plan should also take into account your child's age and whether he or she is likely to outgrow the stuttering. Younger children may not need therapy right away. Their parents and teachers can learn strategies to help the child practice speaking. That can help some children. As a parent, it's important to be calm and relaxed when your child is speaking. If your child feels pressured, it can make it harder for them to talk. The speech-language pathologist will probably want to evaluate your child regularly, to see whether treatment is needed. Speech therapy can help children and adults minimize stuttering. Some techniques include: Speaking more slowly Controlling breathing Gradually working up from single-syllable responses to longer words and more complex sentences For adults, self-help groups can help you find resources and support as you face the challenges of stuttering. There are electronic devices to help with fluency, but more research is needed to see whether they really help over the long term. Some people have tried medicines that usually treat other health problems such as epilepsy, anxiety, or depression. But these medicines are not approved for stuttering, and they often have side effects. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Menstruation, or period, is a woman's monthly bleeding. Abnormal vaginal bleeding is different from normal menstrual periods. It could be bleeding that is between periods, is very heavy, or lasts much longer than usual. It also includes bleeding that happens before puberty or after menopause. Causes can include: Uterine fibroids or polyps Hormone problems Hormone pills, such as birth control pills and hormone replacement therapy (menopausal hormone therapy) Cancer of the cervix , ovaries , uterus or vagina Thyroid problems Bleeding during pregnancy can have several different causes. It is not always serious, but to be safe you should contact your health care provider right away. Pelvic exams, blood tests, imaging tests , and other procedures can help your health care provider diagnose the problem. Treatment depends on the cause. Treatments may include medicines, hormones, and surgery.

Every year, millions of people in the United States receive life-saving blood transfusions.  During a transfusion, you receive whole blood or parts of blood such as: Red blood cells - cells that carry oxygen to and from tissues and organs Platelets - cells that form clots to control bleeding Plasma - the liquid part of the blood that helps clotting. You may need it if you have been badly burned, have liver failure or a severe infection. Most blood transfusions go very smoothly.  Some infectious agents, such as HIV, can survive in blood and infect the person receiving the blood transfusion. To keep blood safe, blood banks carefully screen donated blood. The risk of catching a virus from a blood transfusion is low. Sometimes it is possible to have a transfusion of your own blood. During surgery, you may need a blood transfusion because of blood loss. If you are having a surgery that you're able to schedule months in advance, your doctor may ask whether you would like to use your own blood, instead of donated blood. If so, you will need to have blood drawn one or more times before the surgery. A blood bank will store your blood for your use. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A bone graft transplants bone tissue. Surgeons use bone grafts to repair and rebuild diseased bones in your hips, knees, spine, and sometimes other bones and joints. Grafts can also repair bone loss caused by some types of fractures (broken bones) or cancers. Once your body accepts the bone graft, it provides a framework for growth of new, living bone. If the transplanted bone comes from another person , it is called an allograft. Most allograft bone comes from donors who have died. Tissue banks screen these donors and disinfect and test the donated bone to make sure it is safe to use. If the transplanted bone comes from another part of your own body, it is called an autograft. Autograft bone often comes from your ribs, hips or a leg.

Bone marrow is the spongy tissue inside some of your bones, such as your hip and thigh bones. It contains immature cells, called stem cells. The stem cells can develop into red blood cells, which carry oxygen throughout the body, white blood cells, which fight infections, and platelets, which help the blood to clot. A bone marrow transplant is a procedure that replaces a person's faulty bone marrow stem cells. Doctors use these transplants to treat people with certain diseases, such as: Leukemia Severe blood diseases such as thalassemias , aplastic anemia , and sickle cell anemia Multiple myeloma Certain immune deficiency diseases Before you have a transplant, you need to get high doses of chemotherapy and possibly radiation. This destroys the faulty stem cells in your bone marrow. It also suppresses your body's immune system so that it won't attack the new stem cells after the transplant. In some cases, you can donate your own bone marrow stem cells in advance. The cells are saved and then used later on. Or you can get cells from a donor. The donor might be a family member or unrelated person. Bone marrow transplantation has serious risks. Some complications can be life-threatening. But for some people, it is the best hope for a cure or a longer life. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A heart transplant removes a damaged or diseased heart and replaces it with a healthy one. The healthy heart comes from a donor who has died. It is the last resort for people with heart failure when all other treatments have failed. The heart failure might have been caused by coronary heart disease, damaged heart valves or heart muscles, congenital heart defects, or viral infections of the heart. Although heart transplant surgery is a life-saving measure, it has many risks. Careful monitoring, treatment, and regular medical care can prevent or help manage some of these risks. After the surgery, most heart transplant patients can return to their normal levels of activity. However, fewer than 30% return to work for many different reasons. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Islets are cells found in clusters throughout the pancreas . They are made up of several types of cells. One of these is beta cells, which make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps the body use glucose for energy. Islet cell transplantation transfers cells from an organ donor into the body of another person. It is an experimental treatment for type 1 diabetes . In type 1 diabetes, the beta cells of the pancreas no longer make insulin. A person who has type 1 diabetes must take insulin daily to live. Transplanted islet cells, however, can take over the work of the destroyed cells. The beta cells in these islets will begin to make and release insulin. Researchers hope islet transplantation will help people with type 1 diabetes live without daily insulin injections. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A kidney transplant is an operation that places a healthy kidney in your body. The transplanted kidney takes over the work of the two kidneys that failed , so you no longer need dialysis . During a transplant, the surgeon places the new kidney in your lower abdomen and connects the artery and vein of the new kidney to your artery and vein. Often, the new kidney will start making urine as soon as your blood starts flowing through it. But sometimes it takes a few weeks to start working. Many transplanted kidneys come from donors who have died. Some come from a living family member. The wait for a new kidney can be long. If you have a transplant, you must take drugs for the rest of your life, to keep your body from rejecting the new kidney. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. You cannot live without a liver that works. If your liver fails, your doctor may put you on a waiting list for a liver transplant. Doctors do liver transplants when other treatment cannot keep a damaged liver working. During a liver transplantation, the surgeon removes the diseased liver and replaces it with a healthy one. Most transplant livers come from a donor who has died.  Sometimes there is a living donor.  This is when a healthy person donates part of his or her liver for a specific patient. The most common reason for a transplant in adults is cirrhosis . This is scarring of the liver, caused by injury or long-term disease. The most common reason in children is biliary atresia, a disease of the bile ducts . If you have a transplant, you must take drugs the rest of your life to help keep your body from rejecting the new liver. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

A lung transplant removes a person's diseased lung and replaces it with a healthy one.  The healthy lung comes from a donor who has died. Some people get one lung during a transplant. Other people get two. Lung transplants are used for people who are likely to die from lung disease within 1 to 2 years. Their conditions are so severe that other treatments, such as medicines or breathing devices, no longer work. Lung transplants most often are used to treat people who have severe: COPD Cystic fibrosis Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency Pulmonary hypertension Complications of lung transplantation include rejection of the transplanted lung and infection. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Organ donation takes healthy organs and tissues from one person for transplantation into another. Experts say that the organs from one donor can save or help as many as 50 people. Organs you can donate include: Internal organs: Kidneys, heart, liver, pancreas, intestines, lungs Skin Bone and bone marrow Cornea Most organ and tissue donations occur after the donor has died. But some organs and tissues can be donated while the donor is alive. People of all ages and background can be organ donors. If you are under age 18, your parent or guardian must give you permission to become a donor. If you are 18 or older you can show you want to be a donor by signing a donor card. You should also let your family know your wishes. Health Resources and Services Administration

You may need an organ transplant if one of your organs has failed. This can happen because of illness or injury. When you have an organ transplant, doctors remove an organ from another person and place it in your body.  The organ may come from a living donor or a donor who has died. The organs that can be transplanted include: Heart Intestine Kidney Liver Lung Pancreas You often have to wait a long time for an organ transplant. Doctors must match donors to recipients to reduce the risk of transplant rejection. Rejection happens when your immune system attacks the new organ. If you have a transplant, you must take drugs the rest of your life to help keep your body from rejecting the new organ.

The pancreas is a gland behind your stomach and in front of your spine. It produces the juices that help break down food and the hormones that help control blood sugar levels. A pancreas transplant is surgery to place a healthy pancreas from a donor into a person with a diseased pancreas.  It is mostly done for people with severe type 1 diabetes . It can allow them to give up insulin shots.  An experimental procedure called islet cell transplantation transplants only the parts of the pancreas that make insulin. People who have transplants must take drugs to keep their body from rejecting the new pancreas for the rest of their lives. They must also have regular follow-up care. Because of the risks, it is not a common treatment for type 1 diabetes.

Stem cells are cells with the potential to develop into many different types of cells in the body. They serve as a repair system for the body. There are two main types of stem cells: embryonic stem cells and adult stem cells. Stem cells are different from other cells in the body in three ways: They can divide and renew themselves over a long time They are unspecialized, so they cannot do specific functions in the body They have the potential to become specialized cells, such as muscle cells, blood cells, and brain cells Doctors and scientists are excited about stem cells because they could help in many different areas of health and medical research.  Studying stem cells may help explain how serious conditions such as birth defects and cancer come about. Stem cells may one day be used to make cells and tissues for therapy of many diseases. Examples include Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, spinal cord injury, heart disease, diabetes, and arthritis. NIH: National Institutes of Health

What is acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? Acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) is a neurologic disease . It is rare, but serious. It affects an area of the spinal cord called gray matter. This can cause the muscles and reflexes in the body to become weak. Because of these symptoms, some people call AFM a "polio-like" illness. But it is different from polio . AFM is not caused by polioviruses. What causes acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? AFM can be caused by several different viruses. Researchers think that enteroviruses have been causing the recent increases in the number of children with AFM. AFM can also be caused by other viruses, including flaviviruses, herpesviruses, and adenoviruses. Most people with AFM had a mild respiratory illness or fever (like you would get from a viral infection ) before they got AFM. Who is more likely to develop acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? Anyone can get AFM, but most cases (more than 90%) have been in young children. What are the symptoms of acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? Most people with AFM will suddenly have: Arm or leg weakness A loss of muscle tone and reflexes Some people also have other symptoms, including: Facial drooping/weakness Trouble moving the eyes Drooping eyelids Trouble swallowing Slurred speech Pain in the arms, legs, back, or neck Sometimes AFM can weaken the muscles that you need for breathing. This can lead to respiratory failure , which is very serious. If you get respiratory failure, you may need to use a ventilator (breathing machine) to help you breathe. If you or your child develops any of these symptoms, get medical care right away. How is acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) diagnosed? AFM causes many of the same symptoms as other neurologic diseases, such as transverse myelitis and Guillain-Barre syndrome . This can make it difficult to diagnose. To find out if you have AFM, your doctor may use: A neurologic exam , including looking at where there is weakness, poor muscle tone, and decreased reflexes An MRI to look at the spinal cord and brain Lab tests on the cerebrospinal fluid (the fluid around the brain and spinal cord) Nerve conduction and electromyography (EMG) studies . These tests check nerve speed and the response of muscles to the messages from the nerves. It is important that the tests are done as soon as possible after the symptoms start. What are the treatments for acute flaccid myelitis (AFM)? There is no specific treatment for AFM. A doctor who specializes in treating brain and spinal cord illnesses (neurologist) may recommend treatments for specific symptoms. For example, physical and/or occupational therapy may help with arm or leg weakness. Researchers do not know the long-term outcomes of people who get AFM. Can acute flaccid myelitis (AFM) be prevented? There is no specific way to prevent AFM. But you can take steps to prevent getting sick from a virus by: Washing your hands often with soap and water Avoiding touching your face with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch, including toys Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or upper shirt sleeve, not hands Staying home when sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are adenoids? Adenoids are a patch of tissue that is high up in the throat, just behind the nose. They, along with the tonsils, are part of the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system clears away infection and keeps body fluids in balance. The adenoids and tonsils work by trapping germs coming in through the mouth and nose. Adenoids usually start to shrink after about age 5. By the teenage years, they are almost completely gone. By then, the body has other ways to fight germs. What are enlarged adenoids? Enlarged adenoids are adenoids that are swollen. It is a common problem in children. What causes enlarged adenoids? Your child's adenoids can be enlarged, or swollen, for different reasons. It may just be that your child had enlarged adenoids at birth. Adenoids can also become enlarged when they are trying to fight off an infection. They might stay enlarged even after the infection is gone. What problems can enlarged adenoids cause? Enlarged adenoids can make it hard to breathe through the nose.  Your child might end up breathing only through the mouth. This may cause: A dry mouth , which can also lead to bad breath Cracked lips A runny nose Other problems that enlarged adenoids can cause include: Loud breathing Snoring Restless sleep Sleep apnea , a disorder that causes you to repeatedly stop breathing during sleep Ear infections How can enlarged adenoids be diagnosed? To find out if your child has enlarged adenoids, the health care provider will: Ask about your child's medical history, including asking about your child's symptoms Check your child's ears, throat, and mouth Feel your child's neck Since the adenoids are higher up than the throat, the provider cannot see them just by looking through your child's mouth.  To check the size of your child's adenoids, your provider may use: A special mirror in the mouth A long, flexible tube with a light (an endoscope) An x-ray What are the treatments for enlarged adenoids? The treatment depends on what is causing the problem. If the symptoms are not too bad, your child may not need treatment. If treatment is needed, your child may get nasal spray to reduce the swelling or antibiotics if the provider thinks that there is a bacterial infection. In some cases, your child may need an adenoidectomy. What is an adenoidectomy and why might I my child need one? An adenoidectomy is surgery to remove the adenoids. The provider may recommend this surgery if: Your child has repeated infections of the adenoids. Sometimes the infections can also cause ear infections and fluid buildup in the middle ear. Taking antibiotics doesn't get rid of a bacterial infection of the adenoids. The enlarged adenoids block the airways. If there is also a problem with the tonsils, your child will probably have a tonsillectomy (removal of the tonsils) at the same time that the adenoids are removed. After having the surgery, your child usually goes home the same day. Your child will probably have some throat pain, bad breath, and a runny nose. It can take several days to feel all better.

What is asthma? Asthma is a chronic (long-term) lung disease. It affects your airways, the tubes that carry air in and out of your lungs. When you have asthma, your airways can become inflamed and narrowed. This can cause wheezing, coughing , and tightness in your chest. When these symptoms get worse than usual, it is called an asthma attack or flare-up. How does asthma affect children? Asthma often starts during childhood, usually before age 5. Many children have asthma - it is the most common chronic disease of childhood. It can cause children to miss school and end up in the hospital. But treatments can help manage asthma. What causes asthma in children? The exact cause of asthma is unknown. Genetics and environment likely play a role in which children get asthma. An asthma attack can happen when your child is exposed to an asthma trigger. An asthma trigger is something that can set off or worsen asthma symptoms. Different triggers can cause different types of asthma: Allergic asthma is caused by allergens. Allergens are substances that cause an allergic reaction. They can include Dust mites Mold Pets Pollen from grass, trees, and weeds Waste from pests such as cockroaches and mice Nonallergic asthma is caused by triggers that are not allergens, such as Breathing in cold air Certain medicines Household chemicals Infections such as colds and the flu Outdoor air pollution Tobacco smoke Exercise-induced asthma happens during physical exercise, especially when the air is dry Asthma triggers may be different for each child and can change over time. Which children are at risk for asthma? Certain factors raise the risk of asthma in children: Being exposed to secondhand smoke when their mother is pregnant with them or when they are small children Genetics and family history. Children are more likely to have asthma if one of their parents has it, especially if it's the mother. Race or ethnicity. Black and African Americans and Puerto Ricans are at higher risk of asthma than people of other races or ethnicities. Having other diseases or conditions such as obesity and allergies Often having viral respiratory infections as young children Sex. In children, asthma is more common in boys. In teens, it is more common in girls. What are the symptoms of asthma in children? The symptoms of asthma in children include: Chest tightness Coughing, especially at night or early morning Breathing problems , such as shortness of breath, rapid breathing, or gasping for air Feeling tired Dark circles under the eyes Being irritable Wheezing, which causes a whistling sound when they breathe out Trouble eating or sucking (in infants) These symptoms can range from mild to severe. They may happen often or only once in a while. When children have an asthma attack, their symptoms get much worse. The attacks may come on gradually or suddenly. Sometimes they can be life-threatening. Warning signs of a severe attack include severe coughing, serious breathing problems, and turning very pale or blue in the face, lips and/or fingernails. If your child has those symptoms, get medical help right away. How is asthma in children diagnosed? It can be hard to diagnose asthma in children, especially if they are young. Asthma has similar symptoms as other childhood conditions. And some children may not have asthma symptoms very often, so it may seem like they are having respiratory infections instead. Your child's health care provider may use many tools to diagnose asthma: Physical exam Medical history Chest x-ray Lung function tests , including spirometry, to test how well the lungs work. Younger children are usually not able to do these tests. Allergy skin or blood tests, if you have a history of allergies. These tests check which allergens cause a reaction from your immune system. If you have a young child who cannot do lung function tests, the provider may suggest doing a trial of asthma medicines. The trial involves giving your child the medicines for several weeks to see whether the symptoms get better. What are the treatments for asthma in children? If your child has asthma, you will work with their health care provider to create a treatment plan. The plan will include ways to manage your child's asthma symptoms and prevent asthma attacks, such as: Strategies to avoid triggers. For example, if tobacco smoke is a trigger for your child, you should not allow anyone to smoke in your home or car. Short-term relief medicines, also called quick-relief medicines. They help prevent symptoms or relieve symptoms during an asthma attack. They include an inhaler to have for your child at all times. It may also include other types of medicines which work quickly to help open your child's airways. Control medicines. They work by reducing airway inflammation and preventing narrowing of the airways. Not all children will take control medicines. Whether or not your child needs them depends on how severe the asthma is and how often your child has symptoms. If your child has a severe attack and the short-term relief medicines do not work, get medical help right away. Your child's provider may adjust the treatment until the asthma symptoms are controlled.

What is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder. It is usually first diagnosed in childhood and often lasts into adulthood. But some people don't get diagnosed with ADHD until they are adults. ADHD involves: Having trouble paying attention (inattention) Having trouble controlling impulsive behaviors (impulsivity) Being overly active (hyperactivity) What are the types of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? There are three types of ADHD: Mostly Inattentive ADHD. People with this type of ADHD have trouble paying attention and are easily distracted. It's hard for them to organize or finish tasks. They may have trouble following instructions or conversations. Mostly Hyperactive-Impulsive ADHD. People with this type of ADHD have symptoms of both hyperactivity and impulsivity: With hyperactivity, people feel a need to always be moving. They have trouble sitting still and may fidget and/or talk too much. With impulsivity, people have trouble controlling their actions and words. They tend to act on sudden ideas or feelings without thinking about the possible results. They may interrupt others a lot or have trouble waiting their turn. Combined ADHD. People with this type of ADHD have a mix of inattentive and hyperactive-impulsive symptoms. Combined ADHD is the most common type. It's normal to sometimes have trouble paying attention or sitting still, especially for children. But people with ADHD have more severe symptoms that can sometimes cause serious problems, for example, failing grades for a child or a job loss for an adult. The symptoms are ongoing and may affect family and social life, too. What causes attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? The exact cause of ADHD is unknown. ADHD probably results from a combination of factors, such as genetics and your environment. Researchers are looking at possible environmental factors that might raise the risk of developing ADHD. These factors include brain injuries, nutrition, and social environments. What are the symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? The symptoms of ADHD depend on the type of ADHD a person has: People with symptoms of attention problems may often: Miss details or make careless mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or in other activities Have trouble staying focused on play activities or work tasks Not seem to listen when spoken to directly Find it hard to follow instructions or finish tasks, or may start but get easily sidetracked Have trouble being organized, keeping belongings in order, and managing time Avoid doing tasks that require long periods of mental effort Lose important items, such as books, wallets, keys, eyeglasses, and cellphones Forget about doing daily activities People with symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity may often: Fidget and squirm while seated Get up when staying seated is expected, such as at school or work Run around or climb when it's not appropriate (children) or feel restless (teens and adults) Have trouble doing quiet activities Be constantly moving or "on the go" Talk much more than is normal Blurt out answers before questions are completed Have trouble waiting for their turn Interrupt others for example during conversations or games People with combined ADHD show a mix of inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity symptoms How is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) diagnosed? There is no single test to diagnose ADHD. One step of the process for diagnosing ADHD involves having a physical exam, including vision tests , hearing tests (for children and adults ), and other tests to rule out other problems with symptoms like ADHD. Other problems with similar symptoms include anxiety , depression , sleep problems , and certain types of learning disabilities . The process also involves a thorough medical history and family history.  And it usually includes using standardized ADHD symptom checklists, questionnaires, and/or interview questions. These tools have rating scales (scoring systems) that help the provider see if a person's symptoms and history fit a diagnosis of ADHD. To make a diagnosis of ADHD, the provider needs to have found all of these things: Several symptoms of ADHD that began before age 12. Several symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that have lasted for at least 6 months and cause serious problems: For children up to age 16, there must be at least 6 ongoing symptoms. For people 17 and older, there must be at least 5 ongoing symptoms. Symptoms that happen in 2 or more settings, for example, at home and at work or school. Symptoms that clearly get in the way of functioning well at school, work, and/or in social situations. Symptoms aren't caused by another mental health disorder . What are the treatments for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? Although there is no cure for ADHD, treatments may help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. ADHD is commonly treated with: Medicines. Psychotherapy (talk therapy), including behavior therapy. Education or training for parents to give them the skills and strategies to help their child. This is especially important for younger children. A combination of these treatments. Good treatment plans will include close monitoring, follow-ups, and making changes, if needed, along the way. Having a healthy lifestyle, such as healthy eating and regular exercise , may also help manage symptoms. For school-aged children, school support is important. This could include classroom-based behavioral interventions such as behavior management plans or teaching your child organizational and study skills. It may also include accommodations such as specific seating in the classroom, reduced classwork, or extended time on tests and exams. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurological and developmental disorder that begins early in childhood and lasts throughout a person's life. It affects how a person acts and interacts with others, communicates, and learns.  It includes what used to be known as Asperger syndrome and pervasive developmental disorders. It is called a "spectrum" disorder because people with ASD can have a range of symptoms. People with ASD might have problems talking with you, or they might not look you in the eye when you talk to them.  They may also have restricted interests and repetitive behaviors.  They may spend a lot of time putting things in order, or they may say the same sentence again and again. They may often seem to be in their "own world." At well-child checkups, the health care provider should check your child's development.  If there are signs of ASD, your child will have a comprehensive evaluation.  It may include a team of specialists, doing various tests and evaluations to make a diagnosis. The causes of ASD are not known.  Research suggests that both genes and environment play important roles. There is currently no one standard treatment for ASD.  There are many ways to increase your child's ability to grow and learn new skills.  Starting them early can lead to better results.  Treatments include behavior and communication therapies, skills training, and medicines to control symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

There are many new responsibilities when you have a baby. One of them is to make sure that your baby gets regular checkups, which are also called well-baby exams. These exams are important in making sure that your baby is growing and developing properly. If there are any problems, they can be caught early, when they may be easier to treat. Your baby's health care provider will let you know how often your baby should get a checkup. During these checkups, the provider will give your baby a complete physical exam, which includes: Checking your baby's height and weight Looking at their head, ears, nose, and mouth Listening to their heart and lungs Testing their hearing and vision (for some visits) Checking their reflexes The provider will ask you about your baby's development .  For example, they may ask when the baby started smiling and rolling over. During certain visits, the provider will do developmental and behavioral screening tests . The provider will use all of this information from the visit to check if your baby is meeting important developmental milestones. Your baby will also get any needed vaccines and screenings during the exam. And you can ask the provider any questions you might have about how to care for your baby . You can prepare for your baby's checkups by: Making a list of issues and questions you want to discuss with the provider Being prepared to answer questions about your baby's behavior and eating and sleeping habits Being ready to take notes at the visit In addition to these checkups, you can contact the provider any time if your baby seems sick or if you are worried about their development.

What is birth weight? Birth weight is the first weight of your baby, taken just after being born.  A low birth weight means that the baby is less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces. A high birth weight means that the baby is more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces. What can cause low birth weight? A baby with a low birth weight can be born too small, too early ( premature ), or both. This can happen for many different reasons. They include: Health problems in the pregnant parent Taking certain medicines during pregnancy Substance use during pregnancy Infections during pregnancy Being pregnant with multiple babies Problems with the placenta, the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to the baby Having small parents Genetic conditions in the baby Birth defects What problems can low birth weight cause? Babies with low birth weight may be more at risk of certain health problems. They include immediate problems, such as: Breathing problems Infections Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) Jaundice Trouble keeping warm There is also a higher risk of longer-term problems, including: Delayed motor and social development Learning disabilities Certain health conditions as an adult, such as heart disease , high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity What can cause high birth weight? Causes of high birth weight can include: Having big parents Diabetes in the pregnant parent Certain genetic conditions Too much weight gain during pregnancy What problems can high birth weight cause? High birth weight can be a concern because it can make delivery of the baby difficult and raise the risk of birth injuries. The baby is at higher risk of problems with: Blood sugar Breathing problems Jaundice Can birth weight problems be prevented? You may be able to prevent some birth weight problems by: Getting regular checkups during pregnancy Getting the right amount of nutrition and calories during pregnancy Controlling your blood sugar if you have diabetes Avoiding substance use during pregnancy

What is bullying? Bullying is when a person or group repeatedly harms someone on purpose. It can be physical, social, and/or verbal. It is harmful to both the victims and the bullies, and it always involves: Aggressive behavior. A difference in power, meaning that the victim is weaker or is seen as weaker. For example, bullies may try to use physical strength, embarrassing information, or popularity to harm others. Repetition, meaning it happens more than once or that it probably will happen again What are the types of bullying? There are three types of bullying: Physical bullying involves hurting a person's body or belongings. Examples include hitting, kicking, and stealing or breaking someone's stuff. Social bullying (also called relational bullying) hurts someone's reputation or relationships. Some examples are spreading rumors, embarrassing someone in public, and making someone feel left out. Verbal bullying is saying or writing mean things, including name-calling, taunting, and threatening What is cyberbullying? Cyberbullying is bullying that happens through text messages or online. It could be through emails, social media, forums, or gaming. Some examples are: Posting rumors on social media Sharing embarrassing pictures or videos online Sharing someone else's private information online (doxing) Making threats against someone online Creating fake accounts and posting information to embarrass someone Certain types of cyberbullying can be illegal. The laws on cyberbullying are different from state to state. How is cyberbullying different from bullying? Cyberbullying is a type of bullying, but there are some differences between the two. Cyberbullying can be: Anonymous - people can hide their identities when they are online or using a cell phone Persistent - people can send messages instantly, at any time of the day or night Permanent - a lot of electronic communication is permanent and public, unless it's reported and removed. A bad online reputation can affect getting into college, getting a job, and other areas of life. This applies to the bully as well. Hard to notice - teachers and parents may not overhear or see cyberbullying taking place Which children are more likely to be bullied? Children are more likely to be bullied if they: Are seen as different from their peers, such as being overweight or underweight, dressing differently, or being of a different race/ethnicity Are seen as weak Have depression , anxiety , or low self-esteem Don't have many friends or are less popular Don't socialize well with others Have an intellectual or developmental disability Which children are more likely to be bullies? There are two types of children who are more likely to bully others: Children who are well-connected to peers, have social power, are overly worried about popularity, and like to be in charge of others Children who are more isolated from peers, may be depressed or anxious, have low self-esteem, are easily pressured by peers, and have trouble understanding other people's feelings There are certain factors that make someone more likely to be a bully. They include: Being aggressive or easily frustrated Having trouble at home, such as violence or bullying in the home or having uninvolved parents Having trouble following rules Seeing violence positively Having friends who bully others What are the effects of bullying? Bullying is a serious problem that causes harm. And it doesn't just hurt the person who is being bullied; it can also be harmful for the bullies and for any kids who witness the bullying. Kids who are bullied can have problems at school and with their mental and physical health. They are at risk for: Depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem. These problems sometimes last into adulthood. Health complaints, including headaches and stomachaches Lower grades and test scores Missing and dropping out of school Kids who bully others have a higher risk for substance use, problems in school, and violence later in life. Kids who witness bullying are more likely to abuse drugs or alcohol and have mental health problems. They may also miss or skip school. What are the signs of being bullied? Often, kids who are being bullied don't report it. They may fear a backlash from the bully, or they may think that no one cares. Sometimes they feel too ashamed to talk about it. So it is important to know the signs of a bullying problem: Depression, loneliness, or anxiety Low self-esteem Headaches, stomachaches, or poor eating habits Disliking school, not wanting to go to school, or getting worse grades than before Self-destructive behaviors, such as running away from home, harming themselves , or talking about suicide Unexplained injuries Lost or destroyed clothing, books, electronics, or jewelry Trouble sleeping or frequent nightmares Sudden loss of friends or avoidance of social situations How do you help someone who is being bullied? To help a child who is being bullied, support the child and address the bullying behavior: Listen and focus on the child. Learn what's been going on and show you want to help. Assure the child that bullying is not his/her fault Know that kids who are bullied may struggle with talking about it. Consider referring them to a school counselor, psychologist, or other mental health service. Give advice about what to do. This may involve role-playing and thinking through how the child might react if the bullying occurs again. Work together to resolve the situation and protect the bullied child. The child, parents, and school or organization should be part of the solution. Follow up. Bullying may not end overnight. Make sure that the child knows that you are committed to making it stop. Make sure that the bully knows that his or her behavior is wrong and harms others Show kids that bullying is taken seriously. Make it clear to everyone that the bullying will not be tolerated. Department of Health and Human Services

Cancer is a group of related diseases. In all types of cancer, some of the body's cells begin to divide without stopping and spread into surrounding tissues. Normally, new cells form as you need them, replacing old cells that die. Sometimes, this process goes wrong. New cells form when you don't need them, and old cells don't die when they should. The extra cells can form a tumor. Tumors can be benign or malignant. Benign tumors aren't cancer. Malignant tumors are cancer, and the cancer cells can spread to nearby tissues. They can also break away and spread to other parts of the body. Children can get cancer in the same parts of the body as adults, but there are differences. Childhood cancers may happen suddenly, without early symptoms. Some types can often be cured. The most common children's cancer is leukemia . Some of the other more common types of cancer in children include brain tumors , lymphoma , and soft tissue sarcoma . Symptoms and treatment depend on the type of cancer and how advanced it is. Treatments may include: Surgery Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Stem cell transplants Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells NIH: National Cancer Institute

Chickenpox is an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus. Most cases are in children under age 15, but older children and adults can get it.  It spreads very easily from one person to another. The classic symptom of chickenpox is an uncomfortable, itchy rash. The rash turns into fluid-filled blisters and eventually into scabs. It usually shows up on the face, chest, and back and then spreads to the rest of the body. Other symptoms include: Fever Headache Tiredness Loss of appetite Chickenpox is usually mild and lasts 5 to 10 days. Calamine lotions and oatmeal baths can help with itching. Acetaminophen can treat the fever. Do not use aspirin for chickenpox; that combination can cause Reye syndrome . Chickenpox can sometimes cause serious problems. Adults, babies, teenagers, pregnant women, and those with weak immune systems tend to get sicker from it. They may need to take antiviral medicines. Once you catch chickenpox, the virus usually stays in your body.  You probably will not get chickenpox again, but the virus can cause shingles in adults. A chickenpox vaccine can help prevent most cases of chickenpox, or make it less severe if you do get it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Child abuse is doing something or failing to do something that results in harm to a 
child or puts a child at risk of harm. Child abuse can be physical, sexual or emotional. Neglect, or not providing for a child's needs, is also a 
form of abuse. Most abused children suffer greater emotional than physical damage. An abused child may 
become depressed. He or she may withdraw, think of suicide or become violent. An older 
child may use drugs or alcohol, try to run away or abuse others. Child abuse is a serious problem. If you suspect a child is being abused or neglected, 
call the police or your local child welfare agency.

All kids misbehave some times. And some may have temporary behavior problems due to stress. For example, the birth of a sibling, a divorce, or a death in the family may cause a child to act out. Behavior disorders are more serious. They involve a pattern of hostile, aggressive, or disruptive behaviors for more than 6 months.  The behavior is also not appropriate for the child's age. Warning signs can include: Harming or threatening themselves, other people or pets Damaging or destroying property Lying or stealing Not doing well in school, skipping school Early smoking, drinking or drug use Early sexual activity Frequent tantrums and arguments Consistent hostility toward authority figures If you see signs of a problem, ask for help. Poor choices can become habits. Kids who have behavior problems are at higher risk for school failure, mental health problems , and even suicide . Classes or family therapy may help parents learn to set and enforce limits. Talk therapy and behavior therapy for your child can also help.

Childbirth is the process of giving birth to a baby. It includes labor and delivery. Usually everything goes well, but problems can happen. They may cause a risk to the mother, baby, or both. Some of the more common childbirth problems include: Preterm (premature) labor , when your labor starts before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy Premature rupture of membranes (PROM), when your water breaks too early. If labor does not start soon afterwards, this can raise the risk of infection. Problems with the placenta , such as the placenta covering the cervix, separating from the uterus before birth, or being attached too firmly to the uterus Labor that does not progress , meaning that labor is stalled. This can happen when Your contractions weaken Your cervix does not dilate (open) enough or is taking too long to dilate The baby is not in the right position The baby is too big or your pelvis is too small for the baby to move through the birth canal Abnormal heart rate of the baby. Often, an abnormal heart rate is not a problem. But if the heart rate gets very fast or very slow, it can be a sign that your baby is not getting enough oxygen or that there are other problems. Problems with the umbilical cord , such as the cord getting caught on the baby's arm, leg, or neck. It's also a problem if cord comes out before the baby does. Problems with the position of the baby , such as breech, in which the baby is going to come out feet first Shoulder dystocia , when the baby's head comes out, but the shoulder gets stuck Perinatal asphyxia , which happens when the baby does not get enough oxygen in the uterus, during labor or delivery, or just after birth Perineal tears , tearing of your vagina and the surrounding tissues Excessive bleeding , which can happen when the delivery causes tears to the uterus or if you are not able to deliver the placenta after you give birth to the baby Post-term pregnancy , when your pregnancy lasts more than 42 weeks If you have problems in childbirth, your health care provider may need to give you medicines to induce or speed up labor, use tools to help guide the baby out of the birth canal, or deliver the baby by Cesarean section . NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Healthy teeth are important to your child's overall health. From the time your child is born, there are things you can do to promote healthy teeth and prevent cavities . For babies, you should clean teeth with a soft, clean cloth or baby's toothbrush.  Avoid putting the baby to bed with a bottle and check teeth regularly for spots or stains. For all children, you should: Start using a pea-sized amount of fluoride toothpaste when they are two years old. You might start sooner, if a dentist or doctor suggests it. Provide healthy foods and limit sweet snacks and drinks Schedule regular dental check-ups Forming good habits at a young age can help your child have healthy teeth for life. NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

As children grow older, they develop in several different ways. Child development includes physical, intellectual, social, and emotional changes. Children grow and mature at very different rates. It's hard to say what "normal" is.  There can be big differences in height, weight, and build among healthy children. Diet, exercise and genes are all factors. Some children begin puberty or are close to it before they are teenagers. Children start to become more independent from their parents.  They may rebel.  They also look outward - to their friends, who are usually of the same sex. Peer approval becomes very important. Your child may try new behaviors to be part of "the group." This can also be the time that parents or teachers recognize learning disabilities or behavioral problems in children. These problems can get worse as time goes on, so it is important to get help early.

Brain tumors are abnormal growths inside the skull. They are among the most common types of childhood cancers . Some are benign tumors, which aren't cancer. They can still be serious. Malignant tumors are cancerous. Childhood brain and spinal cord tumors can cause headaches and other symptoms. However, other conditions can also cause the same symptoms. Check with a doctor if your child has any of the following problems: Morning headache or headache that goes away after vomiting Frequent nausea and vomiting Vision, hearing, and speech problems Loss of balance or trouble walking Unusual sleepiness Personality changes Seizures Increased head size in infants The symptoms are not the same in every child. Doctors use physical and neurological exams, lab tests, and imaging to diagnose brain tumors. Most childhood brain tumors are diagnosed and removed in surgery. Treatment for children is sometimes different than for an adult. Long-term side effects are an important issue. The options also depend on the type of tumor and where it is. Removal of the tumor is often possible. If not, radiation, chemotherapy, or both may be used. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is leukemia? Leukemia is a term for cancers of the blood cells. Leukemia starts in blood-forming tissues such as the bone marrow. Your bone marrow makes the cells which will develop into white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. Each type of cell has a different job: White blood cells help your body fight infection Red blood cells deliver oxygen from your lungs to your tissues and organs Platelets help form clots to stop bleeding When you have leukemia, your bone marrow makes large numbers of abnormal cells. This problem most often happens with white blood cells. These abnormal cells build up in your bone marrow and blood. They crowd out the healthy blood cells and make it hard for your cells and blood to do their work. What are the types of leukemia in children? There are different types of leukemia. Some types are acute (fast growing). They usually get worse quickly if they are not treated. Most childhood leukemias are acute: Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) , which is the most common type of leukemia in children and the most common cancer in children . In ALL, the bone marrow makes too many lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) , which happens when bone marrow makes abnormal myeloblasts (a type of white blood cell), red blood cells, or platelets. Other types of leukemia are chronic (slow growing). They usually get worse over a longer period of time. They are rare in children: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is more common in teens than children. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), in which the bone marrow makes abnormal granulocytes (a type of white blood cell). It is very rare in children. There are some other rare types of leukemia in children, including juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). What causes leukemia in children? Leukemia happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA) in bone marrow cells. The cause of these genetic changes is unknown. However, there are certain factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia. Who is at risk for leukemia in children? The factors that raise the risk of childhood leukemia include: Having a brother or sister, especially a twin, with leukemia Past treatment with chemotherapy Exposure to radiation , including radiation therapy Having certain genetic conditions , such as Ataxia telangiectasia Down syndrome Fanconi anemia Li-Fraumeni syndrome Neurofibromatosis type 1 There are other factors that may raise the risk of getting one or more of the specific types of childhood leukemia. What are the symptoms of leukemia in children? Some of the symptoms of leukemia may include: Feeling tired Fever or night sweats Easy bruising or bleeding Weight loss or loss of appetite Petechiae, which are tiny red dots under the skin. They are caused by bleeding. Other leukemia symptoms can be different from type to type. Chronic leukemia may not cause symptoms at first. How is leukemia in children diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose leukemia: A physical exam A medical history Blood tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC) Bone marrow tests. There are two main types - bone marrow aspiration and bone marrow biopsy. Both tests involve removing a sample of bone marrow and bone. The samples are sent to a lab for testing. Genetic tests to look for gene and chromosome changes Once there is a diagnosis of leukemia, other tests may be done to see whether the cancer has spread. These include imaging tests and a lumbar puncture, which is a procedure to collect and test cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). What are the treatments for leukemia in children? The treatments for leukemia depend on which type it is, how severe the leukemia is, the child's age, and other factors. Possible treatments might include: chemotherapy radiation therapy Chemotherapy with stem cell transplant Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Treatment for childhood leukemia is often successful. But the treatments can cause complications right away or later in life. Children who survived leukemia will need follow-up care the rest of their lives to watch for and treat any complications they may have. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What are vaccines? Vaccines are injections (shots), liquids, pills, or nasal sprays that you take to teach the immune system to recognize and defend against harmful germs. The germs could be viruses or bacteria . Some types of vaccines contain germs that cause disease. But the germs have been killed or weakened enough that they won't make your child sick. Some vaccines only contain a part of a germ. Other types of vaccines include instructions for your cells to make a protein of the germ. These different vaccine types all spark an immune response, which helps the body fight off the germs. Your child's immune system will also remember the germ and attack it if that germ ever invades again. This protection against a certain disease is called immunity. Why do I need to vaccinate my child? Babies are born with immune systems that can fight most germs, but there are some serious diseases they can't handle. That's why they need vaccines to strengthen their immune system. These diseases once killed or harmed many infants, children, and adults. But now with vaccines, your child can get immunity from these diseases without having to get sick. And for a few vaccines, getting vaccinated can actually give you a better immune response than getting the disease would. Vaccinating your child also protects others. Normally, germs can travel quickly through a community and make a lot of people sick. If enough people get sick, it can lead to an outbreak. But when enough people are vaccinated against a certain disease, it's harder for that disease to spread to others. The entire community is less likely to get the disease. This is called "community immunity." Community immunity is especially important for the people who can't get certain vaccines. For example, they may not be able to get a vaccine because they have weakened immune systems. Others may be allergic to certain vaccine ingredients. And newborn babies are too young to get some vaccines. Community immunity can help to protect them all. Are vaccines safe for children? Vaccines are safe . They must go through extensive safety testing and evaluation before they are approved in the United States. Some people worry that childhood vaccines could cause autism spectrum disorder (ASD). But many scientific studies have looked at this and have found no link between vaccines and autism. Can vaccines overload my child's immune system? No, vaccines do not overload the immune system. Every day, a healthy child's immune system successfully fights off thousands of germs. When your child gets vaccines, they are getting weakened or dead germs. So even if they get several vaccines in one day, they are being exposed to a tiny amount of germs compared to what they encounter every day in their environment. When do I need to vaccinate my child? Your child will get vaccines during well-child visits . They will be given according to the vaccine schedule. This schedule lists which vaccines are recommended for children. It includes who should get the vaccines, how many doses they need, and at what age they should get them. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes the vaccine schedule. Following the vaccine schedule allows your child to get protection from the diseases at exactly the right time. It gives their body the chance to build up immunity before being exposed to these very serious diseases.

It's important to recognize and treat mental illnesses in children early on.  Once mental illness develops, it becomes a regular part of your child's behavior. This makes it more difficult to treat. But it's not always easy to know when your child has a serious problem. Everyday stresses can cause changes in your child's behavior. For example, getting a new brother or sister or going to a new school may cause a child to temporarily act out. Warning signs that it might be a more serious problem include: Problems in more than one setting (at school, at home, with peers) Changes in appetite or sleep Social withdrawal or fear of things he or she did not used to be not afraid of Returning to behaviors more common in younger children, such as bedwetting Signs of being upset, such as sadness or tearfulness Signs of self-destructive behavior, such as head-banging or suddenly getting hurt often Repeated thoughts of death To diagnose mental health problems, the doctor or mental health specialist looks at your child's signs and symptoms, medical history, and family history. Treatments include medicines and talk therapy. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

A healthy diet helps children grow and learn. It also helps prevent obesity and weight-related diseases, such as diabetes. To give your child a nutritious diet: Make half of what is on your child's plate fruits and vegetables Choose healthy sources of protein, such as lean meat, nuts, and eggs Serve whole-grain breads and cereals because they are high in fiber. Reduce refined grains. Broil, grill, or steam foods instead of frying them Limit fast food and junk food Offer water or milk instead of sugary fruit drinks and sodas Learn about your children's nutrient requirements. Some of them, such as the requirements for iron and calcium, change as your child ages. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your child's health includes physical, mental and social well-being. Most parents know the basics of keeping children healthy, like offering them healthy foods , making sure they get enough sleep and exercise and insuring their safety . It is also important for children to get regular checkups with their health care provider. These visits are a chance to check your child's development . They are also a good time to catch or prevent problems. Other than checkups, school-age children should be seen for: Significant weight gain or loss Sleep problems or change in behavior Fever higher than 102 Rashes or skin infections Frequent sore throats Breathing problems

As parents, we want to keep our children safe from harm. Take steps to keep your children safe: Install the right child safety seat in your car Teach children how to cross the street safely Make sure they wear the right gear and equipment for sports Install and test smoke alarms Store medicines, cleaners and other dangerous substances in locked cabinets Babyproof your home Don't leave small children unattended

Sexual abuse is one form of child abuse . It includes a wide range of actions between a child and an adult or older child. Often these involve body contact, but not always. Exposing one's genitals to children or pressuring them for sex is sexual abuse. Using a child for pornography is also sexual abuse. Most sexual abusers know the child they abuse. They may be family friends, neighbors or babysitters. About one-third of abusers are related to the child. Most abusers are men. If you think a child may have been abused, it's important to report it.

What is circumcision? Circumcision is a surgical procedure to remove the foreskin from the penis. The foreskin is the loose skin that covers the tip of the penis. In the United States, circumcision is often done before a new baby leaves the hospital. What should I consider when deciding whether to have my baby circumcised? As parents, it is your decision whether to have your baby circumcised. When making your decision, you should consider your own religious, cultural, and personal preferences, as well as the medical benefits and risks. You can discuss these with your baby's health care provider before you make a decision. What are the medical benefits of circumcision? The possible medical benefits of circumcision include: A lower risk of HIV and some other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). A slightly lower risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs) during the first year of life and penile cancer later in life. However, these conditions are rare in all males (circumcised or not). Prevention of certain penile problems, such as foreskin infections and phimosis, a condition in which the foreskin can't be retracted (pulled back). Easier hygiene. What are the risks of circumcision? The risks of circumcision include: A low risk of bleeding, infection, or scarring. A very low risk of having too much or not enough skin cut off. Pain. You can ask the health care provider to put a numbing medicine on your baby's penis to lessen the pain. These risks are higher when circumcision is performed on older babies, boys, and men. What else do I need to know about circumcision? Premature babies and babies born with health problems should not be circumcised until they are healthy. If have your baby circumcised, ask their provider how to care for the penis as it heals. If your baby does not get circumcised, their provider can teach you how to keep your baby's penis clean. It's important to know that a newborn's foreskin may not retract completely. Over time, it retracts on its own.

College life involves excitement, along with new challenges, risks, and responsibilities. You are meeting new people, learning new things, and making your own decisions. It can sometimes be stressful.  You have to deal with pressures related to food, drink, appearance, drugs, and sexual activity. There are steps you can take to stay healthy and safe while you're in college: Eat a balanced diet Get enough sleep Get regular physical activity Maintain your health with checkups and vaccinations If you decide to have sex, practice safe sex Make smart choices about alcohol and drugs Get help if you are stressed or depressed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

It is hard when your baby is sick.  Common health problems in babies include colds, coughs, fevers, and vomiting.  Babies also commonly have skin problems, like diaper rash or cradle cap . Many of these problems are not serious. It is important to know how to help your sick baby, and to know the warning signs for more serious problems.  Trust your intuition - if you are worried about your baby, call your health care provider right away.

Croup is an inflammation of the vocal cords (larynx) and windpipe (trachea). It causes difficulty breathing, a barking cough, and a hoarse voice. The cause is usually a virus, often parainfluenza virus . Other causes include allergies and reflux . Croup often starts out like a cold. But then the vocal cords and windpipe become swollen, causing the hoarseness and the cough. There may also be a fever and high-pitched noisy sounds when breathing. The symptoms are usually worse at night, and last for about three to five days.
Children between the ages of 6 months and 3 years have the highest risk of getting croup. They may also have more severe symptoms. Croup is more common in the fall and winter. Most cases of viral croup are mild and can be treated at home.  Rarely, croup can become serious and interfere with your child's breathing. If you are worried about your child's breathing, call your health care provider right away.

Developmental disabilities are severe, long-term problems. They may be physical, such as blindness .  They may affect mental ability, such as learning disabilities .  Or the problem can be both physical and mental, such as Down syndrome . The problems are usually life-long, and can affect everyday living. There are many causes of developmental disabilities, including: Genetic or chromosome abnormalities. These cause conditions such as Down syndrome and Rett syndrome . Prenatal exposure to substances. For example, drinking alcohol when pregnant can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorders . Certain infections in pregnancy Preterm birth Often there is no cure, but treatment can help the symptoms. Treatments include physical, speech, and occupational therapy. Special education classes and psychological counseling can also help. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Until recently, the common type of diabetes in children and teens was type 1 . It was called juvenile diabetes. With Type 1 diabetes, the pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that helps glucose,or sugar, get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much sugar stays in the blood. Now younger people are also getting type 2 diabetes .  Type 2 diabetes used to be called adult-onset diabetes. But now it is becoming more common in children and teens, due to more obesity . With Type 2 diabetes, the body does not make or use insulin well. Children have a higher risk of type 2 diabetes if they  are overweight or have obesity, have a family history of diabetes, or are not active. Children who are African American, Hispanic, Native American/Alaska Native, Asian American, or Pacific Islander also have a higher risk. To lower the risk of type 2 diabetes in children: Have them maintain a healthy weight Be sure they are physically active Have them eat smaller portions of healthy foods Limit time with the TV, computer, and video Children and teens with type 1 diabetes may need to take insulin. Type 2 diabetes may be  controlled with diet and exercise . If not, patients will need to take oral diabetes medicines or insulin. A blood test called the A1C can check on how you are managing your diabetes.

Diabetes means your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too 
high.  With type 1 diabetes, your pancreas does not make insulin. Insulin is a hormone that 
helps glucose get into your cells to give them energy. Without insulin, too much glucose 
stays in your blood.  Over time, high blood glucose can lead to serious problems with your heart , eyes , kidneys , nerves , and gums and teeth. Type 1 diabetes happens most often in children and young adults but can appear at any 
age. Symptoms may include: Being very thirsty Urinating often Feeling very hungry or tired Losing weight without trying Having sores that heal slowly Having dry, itchy skin Losing the feeling in your feet or having tingling in your feet Having blurry eyesight A blood test can show if you have diabetes. If you do, you will need to take insulin for 
the rest of your life. A blood test called the A1C can check to see how well you are managing your diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is type 2 diabetes? Type 2 diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose is your main source of energy. It comes from the foods you eat. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy. If you have diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin or doesn't use insulin well. The glucose then stays in your blood and not enough goes into your cells. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . But you can take steps to manage your diabetes and try to prevent these health problems. What causes type 2 diabetes? Type 2 diabetes may be caused by a combination of factors: Being overweight or having obesity Not being physically active Genetics and family history Type 2 diabetes usually starts with insulin resistance. This is a condition in which your cells don't respond normally to insulin. As a result, your body needs more insulin to help the glucose enter your cells. At first, your body makes more insulin to try to get cells to respond. But over time, your body can't make enough insulin, and your blood glucose levels rise. Who is at risk for type 2 diabetes? You are at higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes if you: Are over age 45. Children, teenagers , and younger adults can get type 2 diabetes, but it is more common in middle-aged and older people. Have prediabetes , which means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes Had diabetes in pregnancy or gave birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more. Have a family history of diabetes Are overweight or have obesity Are Black or African American, Hispanic/Latino, American Indian, Asian American, or Pacific Islander Are not physically active Have other conditions such as high blood pressure , heart disease , stroke , polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), or depression Have low HDL (good) cholesterol and high triglycerides Have acanthosis nigricans - dark, thick, and velvety skin around your neck or armpits What are the symptoms of type 2 diabetes? Many people with type 2 diabetes have no symptoms at all. If you do have them, the symptoms develop slowly over several years. They might be so mild that you do not notice them. The symptoms can include: Increased thirst and urination Increased hunger Feeling tired Blurred vision Numbness or tingling in the feet or hands Sores that do not heal Unexplained weight loss How is type 2 diabetes diagnosed? Your health care provider will use blood tests to diagnose type 2 diabetes. The blood tests include: A1C test , which measures your average blood sugar level over the past 3 months Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test, which measures your current blood sugar level. You need to fast (not eat or drink anything except water) for at least 8 hours before the test. Random plasma glucose (RPG) test, which measures your current blood sugar level. This test is used when you have diabetes symptoms and the provider does not want to wait for you to fast before having the test. What are the treatments for type 2 diabetes? Treatment for type 2 diabetes involves managing your blood sugar levels. Many people are able to do this by living a healthy lifestyle. Some people may also need to take medicine.: A healthy lifestyle includes following a healthy eating plan and getting regular physical activity . You need to learn how to balance what you eat and drink with physical activity and diabetes medicine, if you take any. Medicines for diabetes include oral medicines, insulin, and other injectable medicines. Over time, some people will need to take more than one type of medicine to control their diabetes. You will need to check your blood sugar regularly. Your health care provider will tell you how often you need to do it. It's also important to keep your blood pressure and cholesterol levels close to the targets your provider sets for you. Make sure to get your screening tests regularly. Can type 2 diabetes be prevented? You can take steps to help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by losing weight if you are overweight, eating fewer calories, and being more physically active. If you have a condition which raises your risk for type 2 diabetes, managing that condition may lower your risk of getting type 2 diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is drug use? Drug use , or misuse, includes: Using illegal substances, such as Anabolic steroids Club drugs Cocaine Heroin Inhalants Marijuana Methamphetamines Misusing prescription medicines , including opioids . This means taking the medicines in a different way than the health care provider prescribed. This includes Taking a medicine that was prescribed for someone else Taking a larger dose than you are supposed to Using the medicine in a different way than you are supposed to. For example, instead of swallowing your tablets, you might crush and then snort or inject them. Using the medicine for another purpose, such as getting high Misusing over-the-counter medicines , including using them for another purpose and using them in a different way than you are supposed to. Why are drugs especially dangerous for young people? Young people's brains are growing and developing until they are their mid-20's. This is especially true of the prefrontal cortex, which is used to make decisions. Taking drugs when young can interfere with developmental processes occurring in the brain. It can also affect their decision-making. They may be more likely to do risky things, such as unsafe sex and dangerous driving. The earlier young people start using drugs, the greater their chances of continuing to use them and become addicted later in life.Taking drugs when you are young can contribute to the development of adult health problems, such as heart disease , high blood pressure , and sleep disorders . Which drugs most commonly used by young people? The drugs that are most commonly used by young people are alcohol , tobacco , and marijuana. Recently, more young people have started vaping tobacco and marijuana. There is still a lot we don't know about the dangers of vaping. Some people have unexpectedly gotten very ill or have even died after vaping. Because of this, young people should stay away from vaping. Why do young people take drugs? There are many different reasons why a young person may take drugs, including: To fit in. Young people may do drugs because they want to be accepted by friends or peers who are doing drugs. To feel good. Abused drugs can produce feelings of pleasure. To feel better. Some young people suffer from depression , anxiety , stress -related disorders, and physical pain. They may do drugs to try to get some relief. To do better in academics or sports. Some young people may take stimulants for studying or anabolic steroids to improve their athletic performance. To experiment. Young people often want to try new experiences, especially ones that they think are thrilling or daring. Which young people are at risk for drug use? Different factors may raise a young person's risk for drug use, including: Stressful early life experiences, such child abuse , child sexual abuse , and other forms of trauma Genetics Prenatal exposure to alcohol or other drugs Lack of parental supervision or monitoring Having peers and/or friends who use drugs What are the signs that a young person has a drug problem? Changing friends a lot Spending a lot of time alone Losing interest in favorite things Not taking care of themselves - for example, not taking showers, changing clothes, or brushing their teeth Being really tired and sad Eating more or eating less than usual Being very energetic, talking fast, or saying things that don't make sense Being in a bad mood Quickly changing between feeling bad and feeling good Missing important appointments Having problems at school - missing class, getting bad grades Having problems in personal or family relationships Lying and stealing Memory lapses, poor concentration, lack of coordination, slurred speech, etc. Can drug use in young people be prevented? Drug use and addiction are preventable. Prevention programs involving families, schools, communities, and the media may prevent or reduce drug use and addiction. These programs include education and outreach to help people understand the risks of drug use. You can help prevent your children from using drugs through: Good communication with your children Encouragement, so your children can build confidence and a strong sense of self. It also helps parents promote cooperation and reduce conflict. Teaching your children problem-solving skills Setting limits, to teach your children self-control and responsibility, provide safe boundaries, and show them that you care Supervision, which helps parents recognize developing problems, promote safety, and stay involved Knowing your children's friends NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

Ear infections are the most common reason parents bring their child to a doctor. Three out of four children will have at least one ear infection by their third birthday.  Adults can also get ear infections, but they are less common. The infection usually affects the middle ear and is called otitis media. The tubes inside the ears become clogged with fluid and mucus. This can affect hearing, because sound cannot get through all that fluid. If your child isn't old enough to say "My ear hurts," here are a few things to look for: Tugging at ears Crying more than usual Fluid draining from the ear Trouble sleeping Balance difficulties Hearing problems Your health care provider will diagnose an ear infection by looking inside the ear with an instrument called an otoscope. Often, ear infections go away on their own. Your health care provider may recommend pain relievers. Severe infections and infections in young babies may require antibiotics. Children who get infections often may need surgery to place small tubes inside their ears. The tubes relieve pressure in the ears so that the child can hear again. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Like adults, kids need exercise. Most children need at least an hour of physical activity every day. Regular exercise has many benefits for children. It can help them: Feel less stressed Feel better about themselves Feel more ready to learn in school Keep a healthy weight Build and keep healthy bones, muscles and joints Sleep better at night As kids spend more time watching TV, they spend less time running and playing. Parents should limit TV, video game and computer time.  Parents can set a good example by being active themselves.  Exercising together can be fun for everyone.  Competitive sports can help kids stay fit. Walking or biking to school, dancing, bowling and yoga are some other ways for kids to get exercise.

What is fifth disease? Fifth disease, also called erythema infectiosum, is a viral infection caused by parvovirus B19. This virus only infects people; it's not the same type of parvovirus that dogs and cats can get. Fifth disease mostly affects children. It often causes a bright red rash on their cheeks (sometimes called a "slapped cheek" rash). In the United States, parvovirus B19 infections are more common in late winter, spring, and early summer. There are usually minor outbreaks of fifth disease about every 3 to 4 years. What causes fifth disease? Parvovirus B19, which causes fifth disease, can spread from person to person: Through respiratory droplets, such as saliva (spit), sputum, or nasal mucus. The droplets can spread when: Someone who has the virus coughs and sneezes You touch an item that has the virus on it Through blood or blood products From a pregnant parent to the baby during pregnancy You are most contagious early in your infection, when you usually only have a fever or cold-like symptoms. You are not likely to be contagious after you get later symptoms such as a rash and joint pain. What are the symptoms of fifth disease? About 2 out of 10 people who get a B19 parvovirus infection will have no symptoms. But most people will get the symptoms of fifth disease, which are usually mild and can include: Fever Headache Cough Sore throat Rashes Joint pain The "slapped cheek" rash is more common in children. They usually get the rash a few days after they first have other symptoms. The rash can then spread to the arms, legs, chest, back, and buttocks. Adults who get fifth disease might also have joint pain and swelling (called polyarthropathy syndrome). Sometimes the infection can cause serious health complications affecting the nerves, joints, or blood system. This is more likely to happen if you are pregnant, have a blood disorder such as anemia , or a weakened immune system . Because of these risks to you and some possible risks to your baby, contact your health care provider if you are pregnant and: You show signs of fifth disease (or a "slapped cheek" rash) You may have been exposed to someone who has the infection How is fifth disease diagnosed? There is no routine lab test to diagnose fifth disease. Providers can often diagnose fifth disease just by seeing the "slapped cheek" rash and rashes on the body. There is testing to show whether or not you have protection (immunity) against the B19 parvovirus or if you have had a recent infection. This test is usually not needed, but your provider may order the test if you are pregnant or at higher risk for complications of the disease. What are the treatments for fifth disease? There is no specific treatment for fifth disease. It is usually mild and goes away on its own. To feel better, get plenty of rest. Taking acetaminophen can help with the fever and pain. Do not give aspirin to children, because it may cause Reye syndrome . This is a rare, serious illness that can affect the brain and liver. Can fifth disease be prevented? There is no vaccine to prevent fifth disease. But you can help protect yourself and others by: Washing your hands often with soap and water Covering your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze Avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Staying home when you are sick Most people become immune to the virus after having it once. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Does your child seem much shorter - or much taller - than other kids his or her age? It could be normal. Some children may be small for their age but still be developing normally. Some children are short or tall because their parents are. But some children have growth disorders.  Growth disorders are problems that prevent children from developing normal height, weight, sexual maturity or other features. Very slow or very fast growth can sometimes signal a gland problem or disease. The pituitary gland makes growth hormone, which stimulates the growth of bone and other tissues. Children who have too little of it may be very short. Treatment with growth hormone can stimulate growth. People can also have too much growth hormone.  Usually the cause is a pituitary gland tumor, which is not cancer.  Too much growth hormone can cause gigantism in children, where their bones and their body grow too much.  In adults, it can cause acromegaly, which makes the hands, feet and face larger than normal. Possible treatments include surgery to remove the tumor, medicines, and radiation therapy.

What are head lice? Head lice are tiny insects that live on people's heads. Adult lice are about the size of sesame seeds. The eggs, called nits, are even smaller - about the size of a dandruff flake. Lice and nits are found on or near the scalp, most often at the neckline and behind the ears. Head lice are parasites, and they need to feed on human blood to survive. They are one of the three types of lice that live on humans. The other two types are body lice and pubic lice . Each type of lice is different, and getting one type does not mean that you will get another type. How do head lice spread? Lice move by crawling, because they cannot hop or fly. They spread by close person-to-person contact. Rarely, they can spread through sharing personal belongings such as hats or hairbrushes. Personal hygiene and cleanliness have nothing to do with getting head lice. You also cannot get pubic lice from animals. Head lice do not spread disease. Who is at risk for head lice? Children ages 3-11 and their families get head lice most often. This is because young children often have head-to-head contact while playing together. What are the symptoms of head lice? The symptoms of head lice include: Tickling feeling in the hair Frequent itching, which is caused by an allergic reaction to the bites Sores from scratching. Sometimes the sores can become infected with bacteria. Trouble sleeping, because head lice are most active in the dark How do you know if you have head lice? A diagnosis of head lice usually comes from seeing a louse or nit. Because they are very small and move quickly, you may need to use a magnifying lens and a fine-toothed comb to find lice or nits. What are the treatments for head lice? Treatments for head lice include both over-the-counter and prescription shampoos, creams, and lotions. If you want to use an over-the-counter treatment and you aren't sure which one to use or how to use one, ask your health care provider or pharmacist. You should also check with your health care provider first if you are pregnant or nursing, or if you want to use a treatment on a young child. Follow these steps when using a head lice treatment: Apply the product according to the instructions. Only apply it to the scalp and the hair attached to the scalp. You should not use it on other body hair. Use only one product at a time, unless your health care provider tells you to use two different kinds at once Pay attention to what the instructions say about how long you should leave the medicine on the hair and on how you should rinse it out After rinsing, use a fine-toothed comb or special "nit comb" to remove dead lice and nits After each treatment, check your hair for lice and nits.  You should comb your hair to remove nits and lice every 2-3 days. Do this for 2-3 weeks to be sure that all lice and nits are gone. All household members and other close contacts should be checked and treated if necessary. If an over-the-counter treatment does not work for you, you can ask your health care provider for a prescription product. Can head lice be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent the spread of lice. If you already have lice, besides treatment, you should: Wash your clothes, bedding, and towels with hot water, and dry them using the hot cycle of the dryer Soak your combs and brushes in hot water for 5-10 minutes Vacuum the floor and furniture, particularly where you sat or lay If there are items that you cannot wash, seal them in a plastic bag for two weeks To prevent your children from spreading lice: Teach children to avoid head-to-head contact during play and other activities Teach children not to share clothing and other items that they put on their head, such as headphones, hair ties, and helmets If your child has lice, be sure to check the policies at school and/or daycare. Your child may not be able to go back until the lice have been completely treated. There is no clear scientific evidence that lice can be suffocated by home remedies, such as mayonnaise, olive oil, or similar substances. You also should not use kerosene or gasoline; they are dangerous and flammable. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Most children hear and listen from the moment they are born. They learn to talk by imitating the sounds around them and the voices of their parents and caregivers. But about 2 or 3 out of every 1,000 children in the United States are born deaf or hard-of-hearing. More lose their hearing later during childhood. Babies should have a hearing screening before they are a month old. If your child has a hearing loss, it is important to consider the use of hearing devices and other communication options by age 6 months. That's because children start learning speech and language long before they talk. Hearing problems can be temporary or permanent. Sometimes, ear infections , injuries or diseases affect hearing. If your child does not hear well, get help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that's found in all the cells in the body. The liver makes cholesterol, and it is also in some foods, such as meat and dairy products. The body needs some cholesterol to work properly. But if your child or teen has high cholesterol (too much cholesterol in the blood), it can stick to the walls of their arteries and narrow or even block the arteries. This can put your child or teen at risk of coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . What causes high cholesterol in children and teens? Three main factors contribute to high cholesterol in children and teens: An unhealthy diet, especially one that is high in saturated fats A family history of high cholesterol, especially when one or both parents have high cholesterol Having obesity Some diseases, such as diabetes , kidney disease , and certain thyroid diseases , can also cause high cholesterol in children and teens. What are the symptoms of high cholesterol in children and teens? There are usually no signs or symptoms that your child or teen has high cholesterol. How do I know if my child or teen has high cholesterol? There is a blood test to measure cholesterol levels. The test gives information about: Total cholesterol . This is a measure of the total amount of cholesterol in your blood. It includes both low-density lipoprotein ( LDL ) cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein ( HDL ) cholesterol. LDL cholesterol. LDL is often called "bad" cholesterol because it is the main source of cholesterol buildup and blockage in the arteries. HDL cholesterol. HDL is often called "good" cholesterol because it helps remove cholesterol from your arteries. Non-HDL. This number is your total cholesterol minus your HDL. Your non-HDL includes LDL and other types of cholesterol such as VLDL (very-low-density lipoprotein). Triglycerides . This is another type of fat in your blood that can raise the risk of heart disease. For anyone aged 19 or younger, the healthy levels of cholesterol are Type of Cholesterol Healthy Level Total Cholesterol Less than 170 mg/dL Non-HDL Less than 120 mg/dL LDL Less than 110 mg/dL HDL More than 45 mg/dL When and how often your child or teen should get this test depends on their age, risk factors, and family history. The general recommendations are: The first test should be between ages 9 to 11 Children should have the test again every 5 years Some children may have this test starting at age 2 if there is a family history of high cholesterol, heart attack , or stroke What are the treatments for high cholesterol in children and teens? Lifestyle changes are the main treatment for high cholesterol in children and teens. These changes include: Being more active. This includes getting regular physical activity and spending less time sitting (in front of a television, at a computer, on a phone or tablet, etc.). Healthy eating. A diet to lower cholesterol includes limiting foods that are high in saturated fat, sugar, and cholesterol. It is also important to eat plenty of fresh fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. Losing weight, if your child or teen is overweight or has obesity. If everyone in the family makes these changes, it will be easier for your child or teen to stick to them. It is also an opportunity to improve your health, and the health of the rest of your family. Sometimes these lifestyle changes are not enough to lower your child or teen's cholesterol. Their health care provider may consider giving your child or teen cholesterol medicines if they: Are at least 10 years old. Have an LDL (bad) cholesterol level that is higher than 190 mg/dL, even after six months of diet and exercise changes. Have an LDL (bad) cholesterol level that is higher than 160 mg/dL AND are at high risk for heart disease. Have familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). FH is an inherited disorder that causes very high levels of cholesterol in the blood.

Going home with a new baby is exciting, but it can be scary, too. Newborns have many needs, like frequent feedings and diaper changes. Babies can have health issues that are different from older children and adults, like diaper rash and cradle cap. Your baby will go through many changes during the first year of life. You may feel uneasy at first. Ask your health care provider for help if you need it.

When will my baby take his first step or say her first word? During their first year, babies start to develop skills they will use for the rest of their lives. The normal growth of babies can be broken down into the following areas: Gross motor - controlling the head, sitting, crawling, maybe even starting to walk Fine motor - holding a spoon, picking up a piece of cereal between thumb and finger Sensory - seeing, hearing, tasting, touching and smelling Language - starting to make sounds, learning some words,  understanding what people say Social - the ability to play with family members and other children Babies do not develop at the same rate. There is a wide range of what is considered "normal." Your baby may be ahead in some areas and slightly behind in others. If you are worried about possible delays, talk to your baby's health care provider.

Food provides the energy and nutrients that babies need to be healthy. For a 
baby, breast milk is best. It has all the necessary vitamins and minerals. Infant formulas are available for babies whose mothers are not able to or decide not to breastfeed. Infants are usually ready to eat solid foods at about 6 months of age. Check with your health care provider for the best time for your baby to start. If you introduce one new food at a time, you will be able to identify any foods that cause allergies in your baby. Allergic reactions include a a rash , diarrhea , or vomiting . Many parents are concerned about peanut allergies. When babies can eat foods that contain peanuts depends on their risk of food allergies: Most babies can have peanut products when they are about 6 months of age Babies who have mild to moderate eczema have a higher risk of food allergies. They usually can eat peanut products at about 6 months of age. If you have concerns about this, check with your baby's health care provider. Babies who have severe eczema or egg allergies are at high risk for peanut allergies. If your baby is at high risk, check with your baby's health care provider. Your baby may need allergy testing. Your baby's provider can also recommend when and how to give your baby peanut products. There are some foods that you should avoid feeding your baby: Do not give your baby honey before 1 year of age. Honey may contain bacteria that can cause botulism in babies. Avoid cow's milk before age 1, since it does not have all of the nutrients that babies need and babies cannot digest it Unpasteurized drinks or foods (such as juices, milks, yogurt, or cheeses) may put your child at risk for an E. coli infection . E coli is a harmful bacteria that can cause severe diarrhea. Certain foods that can cause choking , such as hard candy, popcorn, whole nuts, and grapes (unless they are cut into small pieces). Don't give your child these foods before age 3. Because it contains a lot of sugar, babies should not drink juice before age 1

Juvenile arthritis (JA) is arthritis that happens in children. It causes joint swelling, pain, stiffness, and loss of motion. It can affect any joint, but is more common in the knees, hands, and feet. In some cases it can affect internal organs as well. The most common type of JA that children get is juvenile idiopathic arthritis. There are several other forms of arthritis affecting children. One early sign of JA may be limping in the morning. Symptoms can come and go. Some children have just one or two flare-ups. Others have symptoms that never go away. JA can cause growth problems and eye inflammation in some children. No one knows exactly what causes JA. Most types are autoimmune disorders . This means that your immune system, which normally helps your body fight infection, attacks your body's own tissues. JA can be hard to diagnose. Your health care provider may do a physical exam, lab tests, and x-rays. A team of providers usually treats JA. Medicines and physical therapy can help maintain movement and reduce swelling and pain. They may also help prevent and treat complications. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Lead is a metal that occurs naturally in the earth's crust.  Lead can be found in all parts of our environment. Much of it comes from human activities such as mining and manufacturing. Lead used to be in paint; older houses may still have lead paint. You could be exposed to lead by: Eating food or drinking water that contains lead. Water pipes in older homes may contain lead. Working in a job where lead is used Using lead in a hobby, such as making stained glass or lead-glazed pottery Using folk remedies such as herbs or foods that contain lead Breathing air, drinking water, eating food, or swallowing or touching dirt that contains lead can cause many health problems. Lead can affect almost every organ and system in your body. In adults, lead can increase blood pressure and cause infertility, nerve disorders, and muscle and joint pain. It can also make you irritable and affect your ability to concentrate and remember. Lead is especially dangerous for children. A child who swallows large amounts of lead may develop anemia, severe stomachache, muscle weakness, and brain damage. Even at low levels, lead can affect a child's mental and physical growth. Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry

What is a learning disability? Learning disabilities are conditions that affect the ability to learn. They can cause problems with: Understanding what people are saying Speaking Reading Writing Doing math Paying attention Often, children have more than one kind of learning disability. They may also have another condition, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which can make learning even more of a challenge. What causes learning disabilities? Learning disabilities don't have anything to do with intelligence. They are caused by differences in the brain, and they affect the way the brain processes information. These differences are usually present at birth. But there are certain factors that can play a role in the development of a learning disability, including: Genetics Environmental exposures (such as lead ) Problems during pregnancy (such as the mother's drug use ) How do I know if my child has a learning disability? The earlier you can find and treat a learning disability, the better. Unfortunately, learning disabilities are usually not recognized until a child is in school. If you notice that your child is struggling, talk to your child's teacher or health care provider about an evaluation for a learning disability. The evaluation may include a medical exam, a discussion of family history, and intellectual and school performance testing. What are the treatments for learning disabilities? The most common treatment for learning disabilities is special education. A teacher or other learning specialist can help your child learn skills by building on strengths and finding ways to make up for weaknesses. Educators may try special teaching methods, make changes to the classroom, or use technologies that can assist your child's learning needs. Some children also get help from tutors or speech or language therapists. A child with a learning disability may struggle with low self-esteem, frustration, and other problems. Mental health professionals can help your child understand these feelings, develop coping tools, and build healthy relationships. If your child has another condition such as ADHD, he or she will need treatment for that condition as well. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Measles is an infectious disease caused by a virus. It spreads easily from person to person. It causes a blotchy red rash. The rash often starts on the head and moves down the body. Other symptoms include: Fever Cough Runny nose Conjunctivitis (pink eye) Feeling achy and run down Tiny white spots inside the mouth Sometimes measles can lead to serious problems. There is no treatment for measles, but the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine can prevent it. "German measles", also known as rubella , is a completely different illness. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Children aren't just small adults. It is especially important to remember this when giving medicines to children. Giving a child the wrong dose or a medicine that is not for children can have serious side effects. The drug labels for prescription medicines have a section on "Pediatric Use." It says whether the medicine has been studied for its effects on children. It also tells you which age groups were studied. Some over-the-counter (OTC) medicines , like those that treat fever and pain, have been studied for effectiveness, safety, or dosing in children.  But many other OTC medicines have not. It is important to read the labels carefully, to make sure that the medicine is right for your child. Here are some other tips for giving medicine safely to your child: Read and follow the label directions every time. Pay special attention to usage directions and warnings. Watch out for problems. Contact your health care provider or pharmacist right away if You notice any new symptoms or unexpected side effects in your child The medicine doesn't appear to be working when you expect it to. For example, antibiotics may take a few days to start working, but a pain reliever usually starts working soon after your child takes it. Know the abbreviations for the amounts of medicines: Tablespoon (tbsp.) Teaspoon (tsp.) Milligram (mg.) Milliliter (mL.) Ounce (oz.) Use the correct dosing device. If the label says two teaspoons and you're using a dosing cup with ounces only, don't try to guess how many teaspoons it would be. Get the proper measuring device. Don't substitute another item, such as a kitchen spoon. Check with your health care provider or pharmacist before giving two medicines at the same time. That way, you can avoid a possible overdose or an unwanted interaction. Follow age and weight limit recommendations. If the label says don't give to children under a certain age or weight, then don't do it. Always use the child-resistant cap and re-lock the cap after each use. Also, keep all medicines out of the reach of children. Ask your health care provider or pharmacist if you have any questions. Food and Drug Administration

Mumps is an illness caused by the mumps virus. It starts with: Fever Headache Muscle aches Tiredness Loss of appetite After that, the salivary glands under the ears or jaw become swollen and tender. The swelling can be on one or both sides of the face.  Symptoms last 7 to 10 days. Serious complications are rare. You can catch mumps by being with another person who has it.  There is no treatment for mumps, but the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine can prevent it. Before the routine vaccination program in the United States, mumps was a common illness in infants, children and young adults. Now it is a rare disease in the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Your newborn infant has screening tests before leaving the hospital. There may be different tests depending on the state where you live. They include: Tests on a few drops of blood from pricking the baby's heel. The tests look for inherited disorders. All states test for at least 30 of these conditions. A hearing test that measures the baby's response to sound A skin test that measures the level of oxygen in the blood. This can tell if the baby has a congenital heart defect. These tests look for serious medical conditions. If not treated, some of these conditions can cause lifelong health problems. Others can cause early death. With early diagnosis, treatment can begin right away, before serious problems can occur or become permanent. If a screening shows that your baby might have a condition, the health care provider or the state health department will call you. It is important to follow up quickly. Further testing can verify whether your baby has the condition. If so, treatment should start right away. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Obesity means having too much body fat. It is different from being overweight, which means weighing too much. Both terms mean that a person's weight is greater than what's considered healthy for his or her height.  Children grow at different rates, so it isn't always easy to know when a child has obesity or is overweight. Ask your health care provider to check whether your child's weight and height are in a healthy range. If a weight-loss program is necessary, involve the whole family in healthy habits so your child doesn't feel singled out.  Encourage healthy eating by: Serving more fruits and vegetables Buying fewer soft drinks and high-fat, high-calorie snack foods Making sure your child eats breakfast every day Eating fast food less often Not using food as a reward Physical activity is also very important. Kids need about 60 minutes each day. It does not have to happen all at once. Several short periods of activity during the day are just as good. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

If you're a parent, you get plenty of suggestions on how to raise your child. From experts to other parents, people are always ready to offer advice. Parenting tips, parents' survival guides, dos, don'ts, shoulds and shouldn'ts - new ones come out daily. The truth is there is more than one "right" way to be a good parent. Good parenting includes: Keeping your child safe Showing affection and listening to your child Providing order and consistency Setting and enforcing limits Spending time with your child Monitoring your child's friendships and activities Leading by example NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Piercings and tattoos are body decorations that go back to ancient times. Body piercing involves making a hole in the skin so that you can insert jewelry. This is often in the earlobe, but can be in other parts of the body. Tattoos are designs on the skin made with needles and colored ink. A permanent tattoo is meant to last forever. Permanent makeup is a type of tattoo. The health risks of piercings and tattoos include: Allergic reactions Keloids, a type of scar that forms during healing Infections, such as hepatitis To reduce the risks, make sure that the facility is clean, safe and has a good reputation. Proper sterilization of the equipment is important. Be sure to follow the instructions on caring for your skin. Holes from piercing usually close up if you no longer wear the jewelry. It is possible to remove tattoos, but it's painful and can cause scarring.

Pinworms are small parasites that can live in the colon and rectum.   You get them when you swallow their eggs. The eggs hatch inside your intestines. While you sleep, the female pinworms leave the intestines through the anus and  lay eggs on nearby skin. Pinworms spread easily. When people who are infected touch their anus, the eggs attach to their fingertips.  They can spread the eggs to others directly through their hands, or through contaminated clothing, bedding, food, or other articles. The eggs can live on household surfaces for up to 2 weeks. The infection is more common in children. Many people have no symptoms at all. Some people feel itching around the anus or vagina. The itching may become intense, interfere with sleep, and make you irritable. Your health care provider can diagnose pinworm infection by finding the eggs. A common way to collect the eggs is with a sticky piece of clear tape. Mild infections may not need treatment.  If you do need medicine, everyone in the household should take it. To prevent becoming infected or reinfected with pinworms: Bathe after waking up Wash your pajamas and bed sheets often Wash your hands regularly, especially after using the bathroom or changing diapers Change your underwear every day Avoid nail biting Avoid scratching the anal area NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Almost 1 of every 10 infants born in the United States are premature, or preemies. A premature birth is when a baby is born before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. A full-term pregnancy is 40 weeks. Important growth and development happen throughout pregnancy - especially in the final months and weeks. Because they are born too early, preemies weigh much less than full-term babies. They may have health problems because their organs did not have enough time to develop. Problems that a baby born too early may have include: Breathing problems Feeding difficulties Cerebral palsy Developmental delay Vision problems Hearing problems Preemies need special medical care in a neonatal intensive care unit, or NICU.  They stay there until their organ systems can work on their own. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Puberty is the time in life when a boy or girl becomes sexually mature. It is a process that usually happens between ages 10 and 14 for girls and ages 12 and 16 for boys.  It causes physical changes, and affects boys and girls differently. In girls: The first sign of puberty is usually breast development. Then hair grows in the pubic area and armpits. Menstruation (or a period) usually happens last. In boys: Puberty usually begins with the testicles and penis getting bigger. Then hair grows in the pubic area and armpits. Muscles grow, the voice deepens, and facial hair develops as puberty continues. Both boys and girls may get acne.  They also usually have a growth spurt (a rapid increase in height) that lasts for about 2 or 3 years.  This brings them closer to their adult height, which they reach after puberty. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are reflux (GER) and GERD? The esophagus is the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. If your child has reflux, his or her stomach contents come back up into the esophagus. Another name for reflux is gastroesophageal reflux (GER). GERD stands for gastroesophageal reflux disease. It is a more serious and long-lasting type of reflux. If your child has reflux more than twice a week for a few weeks, it could be GERD. What causes reflux and GERD in children? There is a muscle (the lower esophageal sphincter) that acts as a valve between the esophagus and stomach. When your child swallows, this muscle relaxes to let food pass from the esophagus to the stomach. This muscle normally stays closed, so the stomach contents don't flow back into the esophagus. In children who have reflux and GERD, this muscle becomes weak or relaxes when it shouldn't, and the stomach contents flow back into the esophagus. This can happen because of: A hiatal hernia , a condition in which the upper part of your stomach pushes upward into your chest through an opening in your diaphragm Increased pressure on the abdomen from being overweight or having obesity Medicines, such as certain asthma medicines, antihistamines (which treat allergies), pain relievers , sedatives (which help put people to sleep), and antidepressants Smoking or exposure to secondhand smoke A previous surgery on the esophagus or upper abdomen A severe developmental delay Certain neurological conditions , such as cerebral palsy How common are reflux and GERD in children? Many children have occasional reflux. GERD is not as common; up to 25% of children have symptoms of GERD. What are the symptoms of reflux and GERD in children? Your child might not even notice reflux. But some children taste food or stomach acid at the back of the mouth. In children, GERD can cause: Heartburn , a painful, burning feeling in the middle of the chest. It is more common in older children (12 years and up). Bad breath Nausea and vomiting Problems swallowing or painful swallowing Breathing problems The wearing away of teeth How do doctors diagnose reflux and GERD in children? In most cases, a doctor diagnoses reflux by reviewing your child's symptoms and medical history. If the symptoms do not get better with lifestyle changes and anti-reflux medicines, your child may need testing to check for GERD or other problems. Several tests can help a doctor diagnose GERD. Sometimes doctors order more than one test to get a diagnosis. Commonly-used tests include: Upper GI series , which looks at the shape of your child's upper GI (gastrointestinal) tract. You child will drink a contrast liquid called barium. For young children, the barium is mixed in with a bottle or other food. The health care professional will take several x-rays of your child to track the barium as it goes through the esophagus and stomach. Esophageal pH and impedance monitoring , which measures the amount of acid or liquid in your child's esophagus. A doctor or nurse places a thin flexible tube through your child's nose into the stomach. The end of the tube in the esophagus measures when and how much acid comes back up into the esophagus. The other end of the tube attaches to a monitor that records the measurements. Your child will wear the tube for 24 hours. He or she may need to stay in the hospital during the test. Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy and biopsy , which uses an endoscope, a long, flexible tube with a light and camera at the end of it. The doctor runs the endoscope down your child's esophagus, stomach, and first part of the small intestine. While looking at the pictures from the endoscope, the doctor may also take tissue samples ( biopsy ). What lifestyle changes can help treat my child's reflux or GERD? Sometimes reflux and GERD in children can be treated with lifestyle changes: Losing weight, if needed Eating smaller meals Avoiding high-fat foods Wearing loose-fitting clothing around the abdomen Staying upright for 3 hours after meals and not reclining and slouching when sitting Sleeping at a slight angle. Raise the head of your child's bed 6 to 8 inches by safely putting blocks under the bedposts. What treatments might the doctor give for my child's GERD? If changes at home do not help enough, the doctor may recommend medicines to treat GERD. The medicines work by lowering the amount of acid in your child's stomach. Some medicines for GERD in children are over-the-counter, and some are prescription medicines. They include: Over-the-counter antacids H2 blockers, which decrease acid production Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which lower the amount of acid the stomach makes Prokinetics, which help the stomach empty faster If these don't help and your child still has severe symptoms, then surgery might be an option. A pediatric gastroenterologist, a doctor who treats children who have digestive diseases, would do the surgery. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What are reflux (GER) and GERD? The esophagus is the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach. If your baby has reflux, his or her stomach contents come back up into the esophagus. Another name for reflux is gastroesophageal reflux (GER). GERD stands for gastroesophageal reflux disease. It is a more serious and long-lasting type of reflux. Babies may have GERD if their symptoms prevent them from feeding or if the reflux lasts more than 12 to 14 months. What causes reflux and GERD in infants? There is a muscle (the lower esophageal sphincter) that acts as a valve between the esophagus and stomach. When your baby swallows, this muscle relaxes to let food pass from the esophagus to the stomach. This muscle normally stays closed, so the stomach contents don't flow back into the esophagus. In babies who have reflux, the lower esophageal sphincter muscle is not fully developed and lets the stomach contents back up the esophagus. This causes your baby to spit up (regurgitate). Once his or her sphincter muscle fully develops, your baby should no longer spit up. In babies who have GERD, the sphincter muscle becomes weak or relaxes when it shouldn't. How common are reflux and GERD in infants? Reflux is very common in babies. About half all babies spit up many times a day in the first 3 months of their lives. They usually stop spitting up between the ages of 12 and 14 months. GERD is also common in younger infants. Many 4-month-olds have it. But by their first birthday, only 10% of babies still have GERD. What are the symptoms of reflux and GERD in infants? In babies, the main symptom of reflux and GERD is spitting up. GERD may also cause symptoms such as: Arching of the back, often during or right after eating Colic - crying that lasts for more than 3 hours a day with no medical cause Coughing Gagging or trouble swallowing Irritability, especially after eating Poor eating or refusing to eat Poor weight gain, or weight loss Wheezing or trouble breathing Forceful or frequent vomiting NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases How do doctors diagnose reflux and GERD in infants? In most cases, a doctor diagnoses reflux by reviewing your baby's symptoms and medical history. If the symptoms do not get better with feeding changes and anti-reflux medicines, your baby may need testing. Several tests can help a doctor diagnose GERD. Sometimes doctors order more than one test to get a diagnosis. Common tests include: Upper GI series , which looks at the shape of your baby's upper GI (gastrointestinal) tract. Your baby will drink or eat a contrast liquid called barium. The barium is mixed in with a bottle or other food. The health care professional will take several x-rays of your baby to track the barium as it goes through the esophagus and stomach. Esophageal pH and impedance monitoring , which measures the amount of acid or liquid in your baby's esophagus. A doctor or nurse places a thin flexible tube through your baby's nose into the stomach. The end of the tube in the esophagus measures when and how much acid comes up into the esophagus. The other end of the tube attaches to a monitor that records the measurements. Your baby will wear this for 24 hours, most likely in the hospital. Upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy and biopsy , which uses an endoscope, a long, flexible tube with a light and camera at the end of it. The doctor runs the endoscope down your baby's esophagus, stomach, and first part of the small intestine. While looking at the pictures from the endoscope, the doctor may also take tissue samples ( biopsy ). What feeding changes can help treat my infant's reflux or GERD? Feeding changes may help your baby's reflux and GERD: Add rice cereal to your baby's bottle of formula or breastmilk. Check with the doctor about how much to add. If the mixture is too thick, you can change the nipple size or cut a little "x" in the nipple to make the opening larger. Burp your baby after every 1 to 2 ounces of formula. If you breastfeed, burp your baby after nursing from each breast. Avoid overfeeding; give your baby the amount of formula or breast milk recommended. Hold your baby upright for 30 minutes after feedings. If you use formula and your doctor thinks that your baby may be sensitive to milk protein, your doctor may suggest switching to a different type of formula. Do not change formulas without talking to the doctor. What treatments might the doctor give for my infant's GERD? If feeding changes do not help enough, the doctor may recommend medicines to treat GERD. The medicines work by lowering the amount of acid in your baby's stomach. The doctor will only suggest medicine if your baby still has regular GERD symptoms and: You already tried some feeding changes Your baby has problems sleeping or feeding Your baby does not grow properly The doctor will often prescribe a medicine on a trial basis and will explain any possible complications. You shouldn't give your baby any medicines unless the doctor tells you to. Medicines for GERD in babies include: H2 blockers, which decrease acid production Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which lower the amount of acid the stomach makes If these don't help and your baby still has severe symptoms, then surgery might be an option. Pediatric gastroenterologists only use surgery to treat GERD in babies in rare cases. They may suggest surgery when babies have severe breathing problems or have a physical problem that causes GERD symptoms.

What is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)? Respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, is a common respiratory virus. It usually causes mild, cold-like symptoms. But it can cause serious lung infections, especially in infants, older adults, and people with serious medical problems. How is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) spread? RSV spreads from person to person through: The air by coughing and sneezing Direct contact, such as kissing the face of a child who has RSV Touching an object or surface with the virus on it, then touching your mouth, nose, or eyes before washing your hands People who have an RSV infection are usually contagious for 3 to 8 days. But sometimes infants and people with weakened immune systems can continue to spread the virus for as long as 4 weeks. Who is at risk for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? RSV can affect people of all ages. But it is very common in small children; nearly all children become infected with RSV by age 2. In the United States, RSV infections usually occur during RSV season, which is usually fall through spring. Certain people are at higher risk of having a severe RSV infection: Infants Older adults, especially those ages 65 and older People with chronic medical conditions such as heart or lung disease People with weakened immune systems What are the symptoms of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? The symptoms of RSV infection usually start about 4 to 6 days after infection. They include: Runny nose Decrease in appetite Cough Sneezing Fever Wheezing These symptoms usually appear in stages instead of all at once. In very young infants, the only symptoms may be irritability, decreased activity, and trouble breathing. RSV can also cause more severe infections, especially in people at high risk. These infections include bronchiolitis, an inflammation of the small airways in the lung, and pneumonia , an infection of the lungs. How are respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, including asking about symptoms. A physical exam. A lab test of nasal fluid or another respiratory specimen to check for RSV. This is usually done for people with severe infection. Tests to check for complications in people with severe infection. The tests may include a chest x-ray and blood and urine tests. What are the treatments for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections? There is no specific treatment for RSV infection. Most infections go away on their own in a week or two. Over-the-counter pain relievers can help with the fever and pain. However, do not give aspirin to children. And do not give cough medicine to children under four. It is also important to get enough fluids to prevent dehydration . Some people with severe infection may need to be hospitalized. There, they might get oxygen , a breathing tube, or a ventilator. Can respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infections be prevented? There are some vaccines to protect against RVS illness. Two of them are for people ages 60 and older. If you are in this age group, talk to your provider about whether an RSV vaccine would be right for you. There is also a vaccine is for pregnant people. It is given between 32 and 36 weeks of pregnancy. It helps protect their newborn babies from RSV illness for the first 6 months of life. There are two medicines to help prevent severe RSV illness in babies and young children. These medicines may help prevent severe RSV illness, but they can't cure or treat children who already have RSV. And they cannot prevent an RSV infection. Both medicines are given by injections (shots). One medicine is given to infants who are younger than 8 months during their first RSV season. This includes infants who are born during RSV season. This medicine may also be given to some children between the ages of 8 and 19 months who are at high risk for severe RSV illness. For example, they might be at high risk because they: Were born prematurely Have congenital heart disease Have chronic lung disease Have a weakened immune system The other medicine is given monthly during RSV season. It is for children under 24 months of age who are at high risk for severe RSV illness. There are also some steps you can take to lower your risk of getting or spreading an RSV infection, including: Washing your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds Avoiding touching your face, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands Avoiding close contact, such as kissing, shaking hands, and sharing cups and eating utensils, with others if you are sick or they are sick Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue. Then throw away the tissue and wash your hands Staying home when sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Rubella is an infection caused by a virus. It is usually mild with fever and a rash. About half of the people who get rubella do not have symptoms. If you do get them, symptoms may include: A rash that starts on the face and spreads to the body Mild fever Aching joints, especially in young women Swollen glands Rubella is most dangerous for a pregnant woman's baby. It can cause miscarriage or birth defects. Rubella spreads when an infected person coughs or sneezes. People without symptoms can still spread it. There is no treatment, but the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine can prevent it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Your child spends more time at school than anywhere else except home. Schools can have a major effect on children's health. Schools can teach children about health, and promote healthy behaviors. Physical education classes give children a chance to get exercise. Schools work to: Prevent risky behaviors such as alcohol and tobacco use or bullying and cyberbullying Encourage healthy habits like exercise and healthy eating Deal with specific health problems in students, such as asthma , obesity and infectious diseases The school building and environment should be a safe and healthy place for your child.

Smoking cigarettes has many health risks for everyone. However, the younger you are when you start smoking, the more problems it can cause. People who start smoking before the age of 21 have the hardest time quitting. Teens who smoke are also more likely to use alcohol and illegal drugs. The problem is not just cigarettes. Spit tobacco , e-cigarettes , and cigars are not safe alternatives to cigarettes. Low-tar and additive-free tobacco products are not safe either. Young people who do not start using tobacco by age 18 will most likely never start. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Children vary in their development of speech and language skills. Health care professionals have lists of milestones for what's normal. These milestones help figure out whether a child is on track or if he or she may need extra help.  For example, a child usually has one or two words like "Hi," "dog," "Dada," or "Mama" by her first birthday. Sometimes a delay may be caused by hearing loss . Other times it may be due to a speech or language disorder. Children who have speech disorders may have trouble making speech sounds correctly. They may hesitate or stutter when talking. Children with language disorders might have trouble understanding what others say or difficulty sharing their thoughts. If you have concerns about your child's speech or language development, talk to your child's health care provider. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is the sudden, unexplained death of an infant younger than one year old. Some people call SIDS "crib death" because many babies who die of SIDS are found in their cribs. SIDS is the leading cause of death in children between one month and one year old.  Most SIDS deaths occur when babies are between one month and four months old. Premature babies, boys, African Americans, and American Indian/Alaska Native infants have a higher risk of SIDS. Although the cause of SIDS is unknown, there are steps you can take to reduce the risk. These include: Placing your baby on his or her back to sleep, even for short naps. "Tummy time" is for when babies are awake and someone is watching Having your baby sleep in your room for at least the first six months. Your baby should sleep close to you, but on a separate surface designed for infants, such as a crib or bassinet. Using a firm sleep surface, such as a crib mattress covered with a fitted sheet Keeping soft objects and loose bedding away from your baby's sleep area Breastfeeding your baby Making sure that your baby doesn't get too hot. Keep the room at a comfortable temperature for an adult. Not smoking during pregnancy or allowing anyone to smoke near your baby NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Most teenage girls don't plan to get pregnant , but many do. Teen pregnancies carry extra health risks to both the mother and the baby. Often, teens don't get prenatal care soon enough, which can lead to problems later on. They have a higher risk for pregnancy-related high blood pressure and its complications. Risks for the baby include premature birth and a low birth weight . If you're a pregnant teen, you can help yourself and your baby by: Getting regular prenatal care Taking your prenatal vitamins for your health and to prevent some birth defects Avoiding smoking, alcohol, and drugs Using a condom, if you are having sex, to prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs) that could hurt your baby. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms.

What is depression in teens? Depression in teens (ages 13-17) is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. It is an intense feeling of sadness, hopelessness, and anger or frustration that lasts much longer. These feelings make it hard for you to function normally and do your usual activities. You may also have trouble focusing and have no motivation or energy. Depression can make you feel like it is hard to enjoy life or even get through the day. What causes depression in teens? Many factors may play a role in depression, including: Genetics. Depression can run in families. Brain biology and chemistry. Hormones. Hormone changes can contribute to depression. Stressful childhood events such as trauma, the death of a loved one, bullying , and abuse . Which teens are at risk of depression? Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in the teens or early adulthood. Certain teens are at higher risk of depression, such as those who: Have other mental health conditions, such as anxiety , eating disorders , and substance use Have other diseases, such as diabetes , cancer , and heart disease Have family members with mental illness Have a dysfunctional family/family conflict Have problems with friends or other kids at school Have learning disabilities or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) Have had trauma in childhood Have low self-esteem, a pessimistic outlook, or poor coping skills Are members of the LGBTQIA+ community , especially when their families are not supportive What are the symptoms of depression in teens? If you have depression, you have one or more of these symptoms most of the time: Sadness Feeling of emptiness Hopelessness Being angry, irritable, or frustrated, even at minor things You also may also have other symptoms, such as: No longer caring about things you used to enjoy Changes in weight, such as losing weight when you are not dieting or gaining weight from eating too much Changes in sleep, such as having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, or sleeping much more than usual Feeling restless or having trouble sitting still Feeling very tired or not having energy Feeling worthless or very guilty Having trouble concentrating, remembering information, or making decisions Thinking about dying or suicide How is depression in teens diagnosed? If you think you might be depressed, tell someone that you trust, such as your: Parents or guardian Teacher or counselor Doctor The next step is to see your doctor for a checkup. Your doctor can first make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression. To do this, you may have a physical exam and lab tests. If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation . Your doctor may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. You may be asked about things such as: Your thoughts and feelings How you are doing at school Any changes in your eating, sleeping, or energy level Whether you are suicidal Whether you use alcohol or drugs How is depression in teens treated? Effective treatments for depression in teens include talk therapy, or a combination of talk therapy and medicines: Talk therapy Talk therapy, also called psychotherapy or counseling, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. It involves going to see a therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself. There are many different types of talk therapy. Certain types have been shown to help teens deal with depression, including: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which helps you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns. Interpersonal therapy (IPT), which focuses on improving your relationships. It helps you understand and work through troubled relationships that may contribute to your depression. IPT may help you change behaviors that are causing problems.  You also explore major issues that may add to your depression, such as grief or life changes. Medicines In some cases, your doctor will suggest medicines along with talk therapy. There are a few antidepressants that have been widely studied and proven to help teens. If you are taking medicine for depression, it is important to see your doctor regularly. It is also important to know that it will take some time for you to get relief from antidepressants: It can take 3 to 4 weeks until an antidepressant takes effect You may have to try more than one antidepressant to find one that works for you It can also take some time to find the right dose of an antidepressant In some cases, teenagers may have an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants. This risk is higher in the first few weeks after starting the medicine and when the dose is changed. Make sure to tell your parents or guardian if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself. You should not stop taking the antidepressants on your own. You need to work with your doctor to slowly and safely decrease the dose before you stop. Programs for severe depression Some teens who have severe depression or are at risk of hurting themselves may need more intensive treatment. They may go into a psychiatric hospital or do a day program. Both offer counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients. Day programs may be full-day or half-day, and they often last for several weeks.

As a teenager, you go through many physical, mental, emotional, and social changes. The biggest change is puberty , the process of becoming sexually mature.  It usually happens between ages 10 and 14 for girls and ages 12 and 16 for boys.   As your body changes, you may have questions about sexual health . During this time, you start to develop your own unique personality and opinions.  Some changes that you might notice include: Increased independence from your parents More concerns about body image and clothes More influence from peers Greater ability to sense right and wrong All of these changes can sometimes seem overwhelming.  Some sadness or moodiness can be normal.  But feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthless could be warning signs of a mental health problem . If you need help, talk to your parents, school counselor, or health care provider. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

As a teenager, you go through many changes. Your body is on its way to becoming its adult size. You may notice that you can't fit into your old shoes or that your jeans are now 3 inches too short. Along with these changes, you are probably becoming more independent and making more of your own choices. Some of the biggest choices you face are about your health. Healthy habits, including eating a healthy diet and being physically active, can help you feel good, look good, and do your best in school, work, or sports. They might also prevent diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, osteoporosis, stroke, and some cancers when you are older.

Being a teenager is hard. You're under stress to be liked, do well in school, get along with your family, and make big decisions. You can't avoid most of these pressures, and worrying about them is normal. But feeling very sad, hopeless or worthless could be warning signs of a mental health problem. Mental health problems are real, painful, and sometimes severe. You might need help if you have the signs mentioned above, or if you: Often feel very angry or very worried Feel grief for a long time after a loss or death Think your mind is controlled or out of control Use alcohol or drugs Exercise, diet and/or binge-eat obsessively Hurt other people or destroy property Do reckless things that could harm you or others Feel depressed (sad and hopeless) Mental health problems can be treated. To find help, talk to your parents, school counselor, or health care provider.

What is teen sexual health? Teen sexual health is about how sex affects your physical and emotional health. It means knowing how to form healthy relationships and making decisions about sex that are right for you. As your body changes during puberty , how you think, feel, and interact with others also changes. You may have new feelings and thoughts about sex. Understanding who you're becoming as a sexual young adult is also part of teen sexual health. For some teens, that includes understanding gender identity, gender expression, and sexual orientation . For all teens, taking responsibility for sexual health is part of growing up. Whether you choose to have sex or wait, responsibility includes knowing about: Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Birth control What a healthy relationship is What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites that spread from person to person, usually during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. Some STIs are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Without treatment, some STIs can cause long-term health problems. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV (human papillomavirus) Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis STIs don't always cause symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection without knowing it and then pass it on to someone else. The only way to know for sure whether you have an STI is to get tested . How can I reduce my chances of getting a sexually transmitted infection (STI)? The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have vaginal, oral, or anal sex. Saying "no" to sex is the right choice for many teens. If you decide to have sex, "safer sex" practices will lower your chance of getting an STI. They include: Talking with your partner about preventing STIs and getting tested before having sex. If you can't talk about STIs, you aren't ready to have sex. Getting the HPV vaccine. You can be vaccinated between ages 9 and 26. Using condoms correctly every time you have vaginal, oral, or anal sex: External (male) latex condoms provide the best protection against STIs. If you or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Internal (female) condoms, made of nitrile, are placed inside the body (vagina or anus). They may be less effective against STIs than latex external condoms. Don't use both type of condoms together because that increases the chance they'll rip Use a dental dam (a square piece of latex, polyurethane, or nitrile) to protect the mouth during oral sex Having sex with only one person who has sex only with you (mutual monogamy). But first, both of you should get tested for STIs. Not mixing alcohol or drugs with sex. You need to think clearly to make safer choices about sex. How can I reduce the chance of pregnancy? The only sure way to avoid pregnancy is not to have vaginal sex. If you decide to have vaginal sex, birth control can help prevent pregnancy. There are many types of birth control that work in different ways.  Your health care provider can help you choose birth control that's best for you. Condoms are the only birth control method that protects against STIs. But condoms alone aren't the most effective form of birth control. It's safest to use condoms with another form of birth control to prevent both STIs and pregnancy. What is a healthy relationship? Healthy sex starts with a healthy relationship, so it's important to take an honest look at how you and your partner treat each other. Your relationship may be healthy if it includes: Respect. You and your partner value each other's feelings. Neither of you pressure the other to do things they don't want to do. Trust and honesty. You always tell the truth and trust your partner to do the same. Good communication. You feel safe talking openly about your feelings, STIs, and other relationships. And you both listen. Your relationship may be unhealthy if it includes: Jealousy and control. One of you wants to make all the decisions and tries to keep the other from spending time with their friends and family. Disrespect. One of you makes fun of the other person's ideas and feelings. Pressure. One of you tries to bully the other into doing sexual things they don't want to do. Violence . Hitting, shoving, grabbing, and sexual assault should never be part of a relationship. If you don't know how to end a violent relationship, get help. Your decisions about sex can affect your future health. Make sure that you know the facts so you can decide what is right for you.

Teen violence refers to harmful behaviors that can start early and continue into young adulthood. The young person can be a victim, an offender, or a witness to the violence. Violent acts can include: Bullying Fighting, including punching, kicking, slapping, or hitting Use of weapons such as guns or knives Some violent acts can cause more emotional harm than physical harm. Others can lead to serious injury or even death. An important risk factor for violence in teens is the behavior of their friends and classmates. You should know who your kids hang out with and encourage healthy behavior and relationships. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Mastering new skills such as how to walk, talk, and use the potty are developmental milestones.  It is exciting to watch your toddler learn new skills. The normal development of children aged 1-3 includes several areas: Gross motor - walking, running, climbing Fine motor - feeding themselves, drawing Sensory - seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, and smelling Language - saying single words, then sentences Social - playing with others, taking turns, doing fantasy play Toddlers do not develop at the same rate. There is a wide range of what is considered "normal." Your child may be ahead in some areas and slightly behind in others. If you are worried about possible delays, talk to your child's health care provider.

Most young children get sick. It is hard for parents to know what is serious. You can learn what the common warning signs are. In the end, trust your intuition. If you are worried about your toddler, call your health care provider right away. Well-child visits are important to your toddler's health. Toddlers will get their recommended vaccines during these visits. Routine exams and screenings help you and your kids prevent and treat health problems as well as chart their growth and development .

Food provides the energy and nutrients that young children need to be healthy. Toddlers are learning to feed themselves and to eat new foods.  They should eat a variety of foods from all of the food groups. Each day, toddlers need enough nutrients, including: 7 milligrams of iron 700 milligrams of calcium 600 IU of vitamin D

What are tonsils? Tonsils are lumps of tissue at the back of the throat. There are two of them, one on each side. Along with the adenoids , tonsils are part of the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system clears away infection and keeps body fluids in balance.  Tonsils and adenoids work by trapping the germs coming in through the mouth and nose. What is tonsillitis? Tonsillitis is an inflammation (swelling) of the tonsils. Sometimes along with tonsillitis, the adenoids are also swollen. What causes tonsillitis? The cause of tonsillitis is usually a viral infection. Bacterial infections such as strep throat can also cause tonsillitis. Who is at risk for tonsillitis? Tonsillitis is most common in children over age two. Almost every child in the United States gets it at least once. Tonsillitis caused by bacteria is more common in kids ages 5-15. Tonsillitis caused by a virus is more common in younger children. Adults can get tonsillitis, but it is not very common. Is tonsillitis contagious? Although tonsillitis is not contagious, the viruses and bacteria that cause it are contagious. Frequent handwashing can help prevent spreading or catching the infections. What are the symptoms of tonsillitis? The symptoms of tonsillitis include: A sore throat , which may be severe Red, swollen tonsils Trouble swallowing A white or yellow coating on the tonsils Swollen glands in the neck Fever Bad breath When does my child need to see a health care provider for tonsillitis? You should call your health care provider if your child: Has a sore throat for more than two days Has trouble or pain when swallowing Feels very sick or very weak You should get emergency care right away if your child: Has trouble breathing Starts drooling Has a lot of trouble swallowing How is tonsillitis diagnosed? To diagnose tonsillitis, your child's health care provider will first ask you about your child's symptoms and medical history. The provider will look at your child's throat and neck, checking for things such as redness or white spots on the tonsils and swollen lymph nodes. Your child will probably also have one or more tests to check for strep throat, since it can cause tonsillitis and it requires treatment. It could be a rapid strep test, a throat culture, or both. For both tests, the provider uses a cotton swab to collect a sample of fluids from your child's tonsils and the back of the throat. With the rapid strep test, testing is done in the office, and you get the results within minutes. The throat culture is done in a lab, and it usually takes a few days to get the results. The throat culture is a more reliable test. So sometimes if the rapid strep test is negative (meaning that it does not show any strep bacteria), the provider will also do a throat culture just to make sure that your child does not have strep. What are the treatments for tonsillitis? Treatment for tonsillitis depends on the cause. If the cause is a virus, there is no medicine to treat it. If the cause is a bacterial infection, such as strep throat, your child will need to take antibiotics . It is important for your child to finish the antibiotics even if he or she feels better. If treatment stops too soon, some bacteria may survive and re-infect your child. No matter what is causing the tonsillitis, there are some things you can do to help your child feel better. Make sure that your child: Gets a lot of rest Drinks plenty of fluids Tries eating soft foods if it hurts to swallow Tries eating warm liquids or cold foods like popsicles to soothe the throat Isn't around cigarette smoke or do anything else that could irritate the throat Sleeps in a room with a humidifier Gargles with saltwater Sucks on a lozenge (but do not give them to children under four; they can choke on them) Takes an over-the-counter pain reliever such as acetaminophen. Children and teenagers should not take aspirin. In some cases, your child may need a tonsillectomy. What is a tonsillectomy and why might my child need one? A tonsillectomy is surgery to remove the tonsils. Your child might need it if he or she: Keeps getting tonsillitis Has bacterial tonsillitis that does not get better with antibiotics Has tonsils are too big, and are causing trouble breathing or swallowing Your child usually gets the surgery and goes home later that day. Very young children and people who have complications may need to stay in the hospital overnight. It can take a week or two before your child completely recovers from the surgery.

If you are pregnant with more than one baby, you are far from alone. Multiple births are up in the United States.  More women are having babies after age 30 and more are taking fertility drugs. Both boost the chance of carrying more than one baby. A family history of twins also makes multiples more likely. Years ago, most twins came as a surprise. Now, most women know about a multiple pregnancy early. Women with multiple pregnancies should see their health care providers more often than women who are expecting one baby. Multiple pregnancy babies have a much higher risk of being born prematurely and having a low birth weight .  There is also more of a risk of disabilities. Some women have to go on bed rest to delay labor. Finally, they may deliver by C-section , especially if there are three babies or more. Parenting multiples can be a challenge. Volunteer help and support groups for parents of multiples can help. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

It can be scary when your baby is sick, especially when it is not an everyday problem like a cold or a fever.  You may not know whether the problem is serious or how to treat it.  If you have concerns about your baby's health, call your health care provider right away. Learning information about your baby's condition can help ease your worry.  Do not be afraid to ask questions about your baby's care. By working together with your health care provider, you make sure that your baby gets the best care possible.

Alcohol is the most widely misused substance among America's youth. Drinking by young people has big health and safety risks. It is dangerous because it: Causes many deaths and injuries Can lead to poor decisions about engaging in risky behavior, such as drinking and driving or unprotected sex Increases the risk of physical and sexual assault Can lead to other problems, such as trouble in school May interfere with brain development Increases the risk of alcohol problems later in life Kids often begin drinking to look "cool" or fit in with their peers. Parents can help their kids avoid alcohol problems.  Open communication and conversations about drinking are important. So is being involved in your child's life. Get help for your child if you suspect a drinking problem. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

What is whooping cough? Whooping cough, or pertussis, is a respiratory infection that can cause coughing fits. In serious cases, the coughing can become violent and rapid. You may cough so hard that you vomit . The name of the disease comes from the whooping noise you might make when you try to breathe in after coughing. Whooping cough is very contagious and can affect anyone. But it can be especially serious in babies who did not yet get the vaccine. About half of babies under age one who get whooping cough need care in the hospital. What causes whooping cough? Whooping cough is caused by a type of bacteria called Bordetella pertussis. It spreads from person to person. People who have pertussis usually spread it through coughing, sneezing, or breathing very close to someone. It can also sometimes be spread by touching an infected surface and then touching your nose or mouth. If you get pertussis, you are contagious for about 2 weeks after you start coughing. Antibiotics may shorten the time that you are contagious. What are the symptoms of whooping cough? The symptoms of pertussis usually start within 5 to 10 days after you are exposed. But sometimes you may not get symptoms until up to 3 weeks later. Whooping cough usually starts with cold-like symptoms. They may last for 1 to 2 weeks and can include: Runny nose Mild fever Mild, occasional cough The early symptoms in babies can be different. They may only cough a little bit, or they may not cough at all. Babies may have apnea, which means that there is a pause in breathing. They may start to turn blue. If this happens, get medical care for your baby right away. As whopping cough gets worse, the symptoms may include: Fits of many, rapid coughs followed by a high-pitched "whoop" sound Vomiting during or after coughing fits Exhaustion after coughing fits The coughing fits get worse and start happening more often, especially at night. You may have them for up to 10 weeks or more. Recovery from this can happen slowly. Your cough gets milder and happens less often. The coughing fits can come back if you have another respiratory infection, even months after you first got whooping cough. How is whooping cough diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose whooping cough : A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam A lab test which involves taking a sample of mucus from the back of the throat through the nose. This may be done with a swab or syringe filled with saline. The sample is tested for the bacteria that causes whooping cough. Blood test Chest x-ray What are the treatments for whooping cough? The treatment for whooping cough is usually antibiotics. Early treatment is very important. It may make your infection less serious and can also help prevent spreading the disease to others. Treatment after you have been sick for 3 weeks or longer may not help. The bacteria are gone from your body by then, even though you usually still have symptoms. This is because the bacteria have already done damage to your body. Whooping cough can sometimes be very serious and require treatment in the hospital. Can whooping cough be prevented? Vaccines are the best way to prevent whooping cough. There are two vaccines in the United States that can help prevent whooping cough: DTaP and Tdap. These vaccines also provide protection against tetanus and diphtheria . Babies and other people at high risk serious disease should be kept away from people who have whooping cough. Sometimes health care providers give antibiotics to family members of people who have had whooping cough or people who have been exposed to it. The antibiotics may prevent them from getting the disease. You may also help prevent the spread of whooping cough (and other respiratory diseases) by: Washing your hands often with soap and water. You can use an alcohol-based hand rub if soap and water are not available. Avoiding touching your face with unwashed hands Cleaning and disinfecting surfaces that you frequently touch, including toys Covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or upper shirt sleeve, not hands Staying home when sick Avoiding close contact with people who are sick Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is birth control? Birth control, also known as contraception, is the use of medicines, devices, or surgery to prevent pregnancy. There are many different types. Some are reversible, while others are permanent. Some types can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs). What are the different types of birth control? There are several different types of birth control, and they work in different ways: Barrier methods Male condom A thin sheath that covers the penis to collect sperm and prevent it from entering the woman's body. Condoms that are made of latex and polyurethane can help prevent STIs. Female condom A thin, flexible plastic pouch. Part of the condom is inserted into the vagina before intercourse to prevent sperm from entering the uterus. The uterus, or womb, is the place where the baby grows during pregnancy. Female condoms can also help prevent STIs. Contraceptive sponge A small sponge that you put into the vagina to cover the cervix (the opening of the uterus). The sponge also contains a spermicide to kill sperm. Spermicide A substance that can kill sperm cells. It comes in a foam, jelly, cream, suppository, or film. You put it into the vagina near the uterus. Spermicide can be used alone or with a diaphragm or cervical cap. Diaphragm and cervical cap Cups that are placed inside the vagina to cover the cervix. They may be used with spermicide. They come in different sizes, so it's important to see your health care provider to figure out which size works best for you. Hormonal methods Oral contraceptives ("the pill") Pills that a woman takes every day. They may contain only progestin or both progestin and estrogen. Contraceptive patch A patch that a woman puts on her skin each week. The patch releases hormones into the bloodstream. Vaginal ring A thin, flexible ring. The woman inserts the ring into the vagina, where it continually releases hormones for three weeks. She takes it out for the fourth week. After that week, she puts in a new ring. Injectable birth control An injection of a hormone that a woman gets once every three months. This is done in your provider's office. Implant A single, thin rod that a provider inserts under the skin of a women's upper arm.  It is done in your provider's office. The implant can last for four years. Long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) Intrauterine device (IUD) A small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the uterus. This is done in the provider's office. IUDs can last from 3 to 10 years. There are two types: hormonal IUDs and copper IUDs. Sterilization Tubal ligation A surgery that prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is permanent. Vasectomy A surgery that prevents a man from getting someone pregnant. It is permanent. What are some other forms of pregnancy prevention? There are some types of pregnancy prevention that do not involve medicines, devices, or surgery: Other forms of pregnancy prevention Fertility awareness-based methods They are also called natural rhythm methods. They involve tracking the woman's fertility cycle and avoiding sex or using barrier methods on the days when she is most likely to get pregnant. This method may have higher pregnancy rates than other types. Lactational amenorrhea method (LAM) A form of natural birth control for breastfeeding mothers. It relies on the new mother feeding her baby only breastmilk for up to six months and having no periods or spotting during that time. Withdrawal During intercourse, the penis is pulled out of the vagina before ejaculation. The goal is to keep sperm from entering the vagina . But the sperm can leak out before the penis is pulled out, so this method has higher pregnancy rates than other types. What is emergency contraception? Emergency contraception is not a regular method of birth control. But it can be used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected intercourse or if a condom breaks. There are two types: Copper IUD, which is a small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse. Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs), which are hormonal pills which the woman takes as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse. What else should I know about birth control? When deciding which birth control type is right for you, there are many different factors to consider: Do you want to have children someday? How soon? Do you have any health conditions? How often do you have sex? How many sex partners do you have? Do you also need protection from HIV and other STIs? How well does the birth control method work? Are there any side effects? Will you be able to use it correctly every time? How much does it cost? Your provider can answer your questions about birth control to help you select the best type for you. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is circumcision? Circumcision is a surgical procedure to remove the foreskin from the penis. The foreskin is the loose skin that covers the tip of the penis. In the United States, circumcision is often done before a new baby leaves the hospital. What should I consider when deciding whether to have my baby circumcised? As parents, it is your decision whether to have your baby circumcised. When making your decision, you should consider your own religious, cultural, and personal preferences, as well as the medical benefits and risks. You can discuss these with your baby's health care provider before you make a decision. What are the medical benefits of circumcision? The possible medical benefits of circumcision include: A lower risk of HIV and some other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). A slightly lower risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs) during the first year of life and penile cancer later in life. However, these conditions are rare in all males (circumcised or not). Prevention of certain penile problems, such as foreskin infections and phimosis, a condition in which the foreskin can't be retracted (pulled back). Easier hygiene. What are the risks of circumcision? The risks of circumcision include: A low risk of bleeding, infection, or scarring. A very low risk of having too much or not enough skin cut off. Pain. You can ask the health care provider to put a numbing medicine on your baby's penis to lessen the pain. These risks are higher when circumcision is performed on older babies, boys, and men. What else do I need to know about circumcision? Premature babies and babies born with health problems should not be circumcised until they are healthy. If have your baby circumcised, ask their provider how to care for the penis as it heals. If your baby does not get circumcised, their provider can teach you how to keep your baby's penis clean. It's important to know that a newborn's foreskin may not retract completely. Over time, it retracts on its own.

Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common type of male sexual dysfunction. It is when a man has trouble getting or keeping an erection. ED becomes more common as you get older.  But it's not a natural part of aging. Some people have trouble speaking with their doctors about sex. But if you have ED, you should tell your doctor. ED can be a sign of health problems. It may mean your blood vessels are clogged. It may mean you have nerve damage from diabetes. If you don't see your doctor, these problems will go untreated. Your doctor can offer several new treatments for ED. For many men, the answer is as simple as taking a pill. Getting more exercise, losing weight, or stopping smoking may also help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Infertility means not being able to become pregnant after a year of trying. If a woman can get pregnant but keeps having miscarriages or stillbirths , that's also called infertility. Infertility is fairly common. After one year of having unprotected sex, about 15% of couples are unable to get pregnant. About a third of the time, infertility can be traced to the woman . In another third of cases, it is because of the man . The rest of the time, it is because of both partners or no cause can be found. There are treatments that are specifically for men or for women. Some involve both partners. Drugs, assisted reproductive technology , and surgery are common treatments. Happily, many couples treated for infertility go on to have babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is a genetic condition that happens when a male is born with an extra copy of the X chromosome. KS can affect different stages of physical, language, and social development. It also usually causes infertility . What causes Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? KS is not inherited. It's caused by a random error that happens when a sperm or egg is formed. This error causes a male to be born with an extra X chromosome. Chromosomes are tiny "packages" in your cells that contain your genes. Genes carry information, called DNA, that controls what you look like and how your body works. Normally, you're born with a set of 46 chromosomes in each cell, two of which are the sex chromosomes. Females usually have two X chromosomes (XX), and males usually have one X and one Y (XY). In KS, the male usually has two X chromosomes and one Y (XXY). In rare cases, a male could have XY in some cells and XXY in other cells. This is called mosaic Klinefelter syndrome. Males with mosaic Klinefelter syndrome may have fewer symptoms, depending on the number of XY cells they have in their bodies and where those cells are located. What are the symptoms of Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? Some males with KS may have no symptoms or very mild symptoms. So they might not know that they have KS, or they might not get diagnosed with it right away. In other cases, the symptoms can be more severe. Boys with KS may be taller than other boys their age, with more fat around the belly. After puberty, they may have: Smaller testes and penis Breast growth (called gynecomastia) Less facial and body hair Reduced muscle tone Narrower shoulders and wider hips Weaker bones Decreased sexual interest Lower energy Many of these symptoms happen because of low testosterone in the body. Testosterone is the main male sex hormone . Boys with KS may also have learning or language problems. These problems may affect them socially, so they may be shy and quiet and can have trouble fitting in. Most males with KS are infertile because they make little or no sperm. How is Klinefelter syndrome (KS) diagnosed? A genetic test called a karyotype test can diagnose KS. This test can show if there are abnormal chromosomes, including if there is an extra X chromosome. What are the treatments for Klinefelter syndrome (KS)? There is no cure for KS, but treatments are available. The sooner the treatment is started, the better.  If treatment is started by early puberty, it will likely help in reducing the symptoms. Treatments for KS may include: Testosterone replacement therapy Surgery to remove or reduce breasts Physical, speech, behavioral, and occupational therapy In some cases, fertility treatments may help men with KS father children. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Members of the LGBTQIA+ community include people who are: L esbian G ay B isexual T ransgender Q ueer or Q uestioning I ntersex A sexual Elsewhere on the gender and sexuality spectrum or allies to the community On this page you'll find information about health issues that are specific to the LGBTQIA+ community.

Although breast cancer is much more common in women, men can get it too. It happens most often to men between the ages of 60 and 70. Breast lumps usually aren't cancer. However, most men with breast cancer have lumps. Other breast symptoms can include: Dimpled or puckered skin A red, scaly nipple or skin Fluid discharge Risk factors for male breast cancer include exposure to radiation, a family history of breast cancer, and having high estrogen levels, which can happen with diseases like cirrhosis or Klinefelter syndrome . Treatment for male breast cancer is usually a mastectomy , which is surgery to remove the breast. Other treatments include radiation, chemotherapy and/or hormone therapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Infertility is a term doctors use if a man hasn't been able to get a woman pregnant after at least one year of trying. Causes of male infertility include: Physical problems with the testicles Blockages in the ducts that carry sperm Hormone problems A history of high fevers or mumps Genetic disorders Lifestyle or environmental factors About a third of the time, infertility is because of a problem with the man. One third of the time, it is a problem with the woman . Sometimes no cause can be found. If you suspect you are infertile, see your doctor. There are tests that may tell if you have fertility problems. When it is possible to find the cause, treatments may include medicines, surgery, or assisted reproductive technology . Happily, many couples treated for infertility are able to have babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Most men need to pay more attention to their health. Compared to women, men are more likely to: Smoke and drink Make unhealthy or risky choices Put off regular checkups and medical care There are also health conditions that only affect men, such as prostate cancer and low testosterone. Many of the major health risks that men face - like colon cancer or heart disease - can be prevented and treated with early diagnosis. Screening tests can find diseases early, when they are easier to treat. It's important to get the screening tests you need.

Problems with the penis can cause pain and affect a man's sexual function and fertility. 
Penis disorders include: Erectile dysfunction - inability to get or keep an 
erection Priapism - a painful erection that does not go away Peyronie's disease - bending of the penis during an erection due to a hard lump 
called a plaque Balanitis - inflammation of the skin covering the head of the penis, most often in 
men and boys who have not been circumcised Penile cancer - a rare form of cancer, highly curable when caught early

If you are trying to have a baby or are just thinking about it, it is not too early to prepare for a safe pregnancy and a healthy baby. You should see your health care provider for preconception care. Preconception care is care you receive before you get pregnant. Your health care provider can help you figure out which steps you need to take now, such as: Finding and taking care of any problems that might affect you and your baby later, like diabetes or high blood pressure Increasing the amount of folic acid you get to prevent neural tube defects Getting up to date on vaccines Avoiding smoking, drinking alcohol, or taking drugs Trying to reach a healthy weight By taking action on health issues before pregnancy, you can prevent many future problems for yourself and your baby. Once you're pregnant,  you'll get prenatal care until your baby is born. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is prostate cancer? Cancer is a disease in which cells in the body grow out of control. Prostate cancer begins in the cells of the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer. It often grows very slowly. If it does not spread to other parts of the body, it may not cause serious problems. But sometimes prostate cancer can grow quickly and spread to other parts of the body. This kind of prostate cancer is serious. What causes prostate cancer? Researchers don't know for sure what causes prostate cancer. They do know that it happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA). Sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. There are also certain genetic changes that happen during your lifetime that can raise your risk of prostate cancer. But often the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Who is more likely to develop prostate cancer? Anyone who has a prostate can develop prostate cancer. But certain factors can make you more likely to develop it: Age. Your chance of developing prostate cancer increases as you get older. Prostate cancer is rare in people under age 50. Family health history. Your risk of prostate cancer is higher if you have a parent, sibling, or child who has or has had prostate cancer. Race. African Americans are more likely to get prostate cancer.  They're also more likely to: Get prostate cancer at a younger age. Have more serious prostate cancer. Die from prostate cancer. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? Prostate cancer doesn't always cause symptoms, especially at first. If it does cause symptoms, they may include: Problems urinating (peeing), such as: A urine stream that's weak, hard to start, or starts and stops Suddenly needing to urinate right away Urinating often, especially at night Pain or burning when urinating Blood in your urine or semen Pain in your lower back , hips, or pelvis that does not go away Painful ejaculation (the release of semen through the penis during orgasm) But many of these symptoms may be from other common prostate problems that aren't cancer, such as an enlarged prostate . You should discuss your prostate health with your health care provider if you: Have symptoms that could be prostate cancer Have a high risk for developing prostate cancer Had a screening test that suggests you could have prostate cancer What are prostate tests and how is prostate cancer diagnosed? Tests which check for prostate cancer include: A digital rectal exam (DRE). In this exam, your provider feels your prostate for lumps or anything unusual by inserting a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum. A prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test. A high PSA blood level may be a sign of prostate cancer. But many other things can cause high PSA levels, too. Imaging tests. These tests may use ultrasound or MRI to make pictures of your prostate. If these tests show that you might have prostate cancer, the next step is usually a prostate biopsy . A biopsy is the only way to diagnose prostate cancer. During a biopsy, a doctor uses a hollow needle to remove some prostate tissue. The tissue is studied under a microscope to look for cancer cells. What are the treatments for prostate cancer? Your treatment options usually depend on your age, your general health, and how serious the cancer is. Your treatment may include one or more of options: Observation ,which is mostly used if you are older, your prostate cancer isn't likely to grow quickly, and you don't have symptoms or you have other medical conditions. Your doctor will keep checking on your cancer over time so to see whether you will need to start treatment for the cancer. There are two types of observation: Watchful waiting means having little or no testing. If symptoms begin or change, you will get treatment to relieve them, but not to treat the cancer. Active surveillance means having regular tests to see if your prostate cancer has changed. If the tests show the cancer is starting to grow or if you develop symptoms, then you will have treatment to try to cure the cancer. Surgery to remove your prostate gland may be an option if your cancer hasn't spread outside of your prostate. Radiation therapy uses high energy to kill cancer cells or prevent them from growing. Hormone therapy blocks cancer cells from getting the hormones they need to grow. It may include taking medicines or having surgery to remove the testicles. Chemotherapy uses medicines to kill cancer cells, slow their growth, or stop them from spreading. You might take the drugs by mouth, as an injection (shot), as a cream, or intravenously (by IV). Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells. This treatment causes less harm to healthy cells than radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Immunotherapy helps your own immune system to fight cancer. Can prostate cancer be prevented? Making healthy lifestyle changes may help to prevent some prostate cancers. These changes include: Being at a healthy weight Quitting smoking Getting enough exercise Eating healthy foods NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is cancer screening? Cancer is a disease when the cells of the body grow out of control. Cancer screening is having tests to look for signs of cancer before you have any symptoms. By the time cancer causes symptoms, it may have already spread to other parts of your body. A screening test may help find cancer early, when it may be easier to treat. Cancer screening only tells you whether you might have cancer. It doesn't diagnose cancer. If a screening test shows signs of cancer, you'll need to have other tests to find out if you do have cancer and how serious it may be. What is prostate cancer screening? Prostate cancer screening looks for signs of cancer in the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. Prostate cancer is most common in people over age 50. It usually grows slowly and doesn't cause health problems. In fact, it's possible to live a long life with prostate cancer and never know you have it. But in certain cases, prostate cancer may spread to other parts of the body and can be very serious. The goal of prostate cancer screening is to find prostate cancers that may be more likely to spread so they can be treated early. What tests screen for prostate cancer? Two tests are commonly used to screen for prostate cancer: A prostate-specific antigen test , also called a PSA blood test. PSA is a protein made by your prostate. A high level of PSA in your blood may mean you have prostate cancer, but it's not proof of cancer.  That's because many other things may cause high PSA levels, including: Having an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH) Having other common prostate problems Taking certain medicines In general, the higher your PSA, the more likely it is that you have cancer. But a low PSA blood level isn't a guarantee that you don't have cancer. Digital Rectal Examination (DRE). The DRE is a prostate exam.  In this exam, your health care provider inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum to feel your prostate for lumps or anything unusual. A DRE can check only one side of the prostate. A PSA test or a DRE may be able to detect prostate cancer at an early stage. But it is not clear whether early detection and treatment lower the risk of dying from prostate cancer. You should talk with your provider about the benefits and harms of prostate cancer screening. What are the possible benefits and harms of prostate cancer screening? The possible benefits of prostate cancer screening include: Finding and treating prostate cancer early before it spreads Getting a better sense of your prostate cancer risk (based on your PSA test) Peace of mind if your screening shows you're unlikely to have prostate cancer now The option to choose further testing and closely monitor your prostate if your screening shows you may have cancer The possible harms of prostate cancer screening include: Getting a false positive result. This means that your PSA test shows you may have prostate cancer when you really don't. A false positive may lead to: Worry while you have more tests to look for signs of cancer. A prostate biopsy .  In a biopsy, a doctor removes tissue from your prostate so it can be studied under a microscope to look for cancer cells. This is the only way to diagnose cancer. The possible harms of a prostate biopsy include: Fever Pain Blood in semen Urinary tract infection Having prostate cancer treatment that you may not have needed. Prostate cancer screening may lead to a cancer diagnosis, but it's not always clear whether the cancer is likely to grow and spread. You could have unnecessary treatment for cancer that would never have caused any health problems. And the common prostate cancer treatments may have serious, permanent complications, such as: Urinary incontinence Erectile dysfunction Problems controlling your bowel movements (BMs) Should I be screened for prostate cancer? Since there are benefits and risks to prostate screening, you should talk with your provider to decide if screening is right for you. You and your provider should consider: Your age. The risk of prostate cancer increases after age 50. Your family health history. If members of your family have had prostate cancer, your risk may be higher. Your race. Prostate cancer is more common in African Americans.  They also have a higher risk of developing prostate cancer at a younger age and having more serious disease. Your general health. Are you well enough to have treatment for prostate cancer if it's found? What you prefer. How do you feel about the possible benefits and harms of screening, diagnosis, and treatment? NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is the prostate? The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. What are prostate diseases? There are many types of prostate diseases: Prostatitis is inflammation (swelling and pain) in the prostate gland. It's the most common type of prostate problem in people under than age 50. There are different types: Chronic prostatitis is also called chronic pelvic pain syndrome. It's the most common type of prostatitis. Acute bacterial prostatitis starts suddenly from a bacterial infection and is treated with antibiotics . It is not common. Chronic bacterial prostatitis happens when a bacterial infection keeps coming back. The symptoms usually start slowly. It may take longer to treat than acute bacterial prostatitis. Asymptomatic prostatitis has no symptoms and usually doesn't need treatment. You may learn you have it after having tests for other health problems. Enlarged prostate is also called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) . The prostate gland tends to grow larger with age. That's why enlarged prostate is very common in older people and rare in those who are under age 40. When the prostate grows larger, it may press on your urethra and cause problems with urination . Prostate cancer happens when cancer cells form in the prostate gland. Prostate cancer is a common type of cancer in those aged 50 and older. Most prostate cancers grow slowly and may never cause health problems. But certain prostate cancers are serious. Who is more likely to develop prostate diseases? Anyone with a prostate can develop prostate problems. But some people are at higher risk. You may be more likely to develop prostatitis if you have: A lower urinary tract infection , also called a UTI. An infection in your lower urinary tract (bladder and urethra) may lead to acute or chronic bacterial prostatitis. Nerve damage in your lower urinary tract from surgery or an injury. This may lead to chronic prostatitis. Emotional stress , which can lead to chronic prostatitis. You may be more likely to develop an enlarged prostate (BPH) if you: Are age 40 or older. Have family members who have had BPH. Have certain health conditions such as: Obesity . Heart disease and problems with blood circulation . Type 2 diabetes . Don't get enough physical activity . You may be more likely to develop prostate cancer if you: Are older than age 50. Have a parent, sibling, or child who has or had prostate cancer. Are African American. What are the symptoms of prostate diseases? The symptoms of prostate problems include: Needing to urinate a lot . Needing to rush to the bathroom, but not being able to urinate or only going a little. Leaking or dribbling urine . Having a weak urine stream. Other symptoms depend on the type of prostate problem you have and may include: Not being able to urinate at all. This is a medical emergency. Any problems, starting or controlling urine flow. Waking up often to urinate. Blood in your urine or urine that has an unusual smell or color. Fever , chills, or body aches. Great discomfort or pain: While urinating or after ejaculation. In your abdomen (belly), between your scrotum and anus, or in your scrotum or penis. Contact your provider if you have any of these symptoms. How are prostate diseases diagnosed? To find out if you have a prostate problem, your provider will: Ask about your medical history and symptoms. Ask about your family health history. Do a physical exam. The exam may include a digital rectal exam (DRE) of your prostate. In a DRE, your provider inserts a gloved finger into your rectum to feel the general size and condition of your prostate. Order tests, if needed. Tests may include: Blood and urine tests to look for infection. Urodynamic testing to see how well you can hold and release urine. Cystoscopy to look inside your urethra and bladder . Ultrasound pictures of your prostate and urinary tract. A PSA blood test (prostate-specific antigen test). Prostate biopsy to diagnose or rule out cancer. Treatment depends on what prostate disease you have and which symptoms bother you most. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy . If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start. Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides. Use good hygiene , including handwashing. If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures.

Sexuality is a big part of being human. Love, affection and sexual intimacy all play a role in healthy relationships. They also contribute to your sense of well-being. A number of disorders can affect the ability to have or enjoy sex  in both men and women . Factors that can affect sexual health include: Fear of unplanned pregnancy Concerns about infertility Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Chronic diseases such as cancer or heart disease Medicines that affect sexual desire or performance

What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are infections that are passed from one person to another through sexual contact. They are usually spread during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. But sometimes they can spread through other sexual contact involving the penis, vagina, mouth, or anus. This is because some STIs, like herpes and HPV, are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Some STIs can be passed from a pregnant person to the baby, either during pregnancy or when giving birth. Other ways that some STIs may be spread include during breastfeeding , through blood transfusions , or by sharing needles. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis What causes sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs can be caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites . Who is affected by sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Most STIs affect both men and women, but in many cases the health problems they cause can be more severe for 
women. If an STI is passed to a baby, it can cause serious health problems. What are the symptoms of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs don't always cause symptoms or may only cause mild symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection and not know it. And even without symptoms, STIs can still be harmful and may be passed on during sex. If there are symptoms, they could include: Unusual discharge from the penis or vagina Sores or warts on the genital area Painful or frequent urination (peeing) Itching and redness in the genital area Blisters or sores in or around the mouth Abnormal vaginal odor Anal itching, soreness, or bleeding Abdominal (belly) pain Fever How are sexually transmitted infections (STIs) diagnosed? If you are sexually active, you should talk to your health care provider about your risk for STIs and whether you need to be tested. This is especially important since many STIs do not usually cause symptoms. Some STIs may be diagnosed during a physical exam or through STI testing . Some tests involve a microscopic examination of a sore or fluid swabbed from the vagina, penis, or anus. Blood tests can diagnose other types of STIs. What are the treatments for sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Antibiotics can treat STIs that are caused by bacteria or parasites. There is no cure for STIs caused by viruses, but antiviral medicines can often help with the symptoms and lower your risk of spreading the infection. It's important to get treatment if you have an STI. Some types of STIs can cause serious health problems if they are not treated. Can sexually transmitted infections (STIs) be prevented? The surest way to protect yourself against STIs is to not have sex. If you do decide to have sex, you can lower your risk of getting an STI by: Having you and your partner tested for STIs before having sex. Using a condom every time you have sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading STIs. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Reducing your number of sex partners. You might even consider "mutual monogamy" with just one partner. This means that you agree to be sexually active only with them, and they agree to be sexually active only with you. But first you should both get tested to make sure that you don't already have an STI. Getting vaccinated against HPV and hepatitis B .

Many men have sexual problems. They become more common as men age.  Problems can include: Erectile dysfunction Reduced or lost interest in sex Problems with ejaculation Low testosterone Stress, illness, medicines, or emotional problems may also be factors.  Occasional problems with sexual function are common. If problems last more than a few months or cause distress for you or your partner, you should see your health care provider.

What is testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is a cancer that develops in the tissues of one or both testicles. The testicles, or testes, are part of the male reproductive system. They make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped glands inside the scrotum, a sac of loose skin that lies below the penis. You can get cancer in one or both testicles. Who is most likely to develop testicular cancer? Testicular cancer is very rare. You can get it at any age, but it is most common in men between the ages of 20 and 39.  It is also more common in those who: Have had abnormal testicle development Have had an undescended testicle, a condition in which one or both testicles fail to move into the scrotum before birth Have had testicle cancer before Have a family history of the cancer Are White What are the symptoms of testicular cancer? The symptoms of testicular cancer may include: A painless lump or swelling in either testicle A change in how the testicle feels A dull ache in the lower abdomen (belly) or the groin (the area where the thigh meets the abdomen) A sudden build-up of fluid in the scrotum Pain or discomfort in a testicle or in the scrotum How is testicular cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have testicular cancer, your health care provider may use: A physical exam. Blood tests. An ultrasound of the testicles. An inguinal orchiectomy, which is a procedure to remove the entire testicle. A tissue sample from the testicle is viewed under a microscope to check for cancer cells. What are the treatments for testicular cancer? Testicular cancer can usually be cured.The treatment options include: Surgery (if the testicle has not already been removed during diagnosis). Radiation therapy . Chemotherapy . High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplant . Surveillance, which might be done after surgery. It means that your provider will closely follow your condition with regular exams and tests. You won't get any further treatment unless there are changes in your test results. Some of the treatments may also cause infertility . If you may want to have children later on, you should consider sperm banking before treatment. After you have finished your treatment, you will need regular follow-up testing to make sure that the cancer has not come back. If you have had cancer in one testicle, you have a higher risk of getting cancer in the other testicle. So it's important to check the other testicle regularly and let your provider know if you notice any changes or unusual symptoms. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Testicles, or testes, make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped organs inside the scrotum, the loose sac of skin behind the penis. It's easy to injure your testicles because they are not protected by bones or muscles. Men and boys should wear athletic supporters when they play sports. You should examine your testicles monthly and seek medical attention for lumps, redness, pain or other changes. Testicles can get inflamed or infected. They can also develop cancer. Testicular cancer is rare and highly treatable. It usually happens between the ages of 15 and 40.

A vasectomy is a type of minor surgery that prevents a man from being able to get a woman pregnant. It is a permanent form of birth control . A vasectomy works by cutting the vas deferens, which are the tubes that carry the sperm out of the testicles. Then the sperm can no longer reach the semen. Semen is the fluid that the penis ejaculates (releases during orgasm). Since there are no sperm, the man cannot get a woman pregnant. The surgery is quick; it usually takes less than 30 minutes. You will probably be able to go home the same day. You may have some discomfort, bruising, and swelling for a few days. In most cases, you will fully recover in less than a week. A vasectomy is one of the most effective forms of birth control. But it takes about three months (or about 20 ejaculations) before it is effective. You will still need to use other birth control until you know that your semen doesn't have any more sperm in it. After two to three months, your health care provider will test your semen to make sure that there are no sperm in it. Having a vasectomy does not affect your sex life. It does not decrease your sex drive. And it will not affect your ability to get an erection or have an orgasm. Vasectomies can sometimes be reversed, but not always. It is done with a procedure to reconnect the vas deferens. Another option if you decide to have children later might be to have sperm taken from your testicles. The sperm could then be used for in vitro fertilization (IVF). However, this may not always work. It's also important to know that both a vasectomy reversal and IVF are expensive. Having a vasectomy does not protect you from sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as HIV .   Using a condom every time you have anal, vaginal, or oral sex is the only way to protect against STIs. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

A caregiver gives care to someone who needs help taking care of themselves. It can be rewarding. It may help to strengthen connections to a loved one. You may feel fulfillment from helping someone else. But sometimes caregiving can be stressful and even overwhelming. This can be especially true when caring for someone with Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD is an illness that changes the brain. It causes people to lose the ability to remember, think, and use good judgment. They also have trouble taking care of themselves. Over time, as the disease gets worse, they will need more and more help. As a caregiver, it is important for you to learn about AD. You will want to know what happens to the person during the different stages of the disease. This can help you plan for the future, so that you will have all of the resources you will need to be able to take care of your loved one. As a caregiver for someone with AD, your responsibilities can include: Getting your loved one's health, legal, and financial affairs in order. If possible, include them in the planning while they can still make decisions. Later you will need to take over managing their finances and paying their bills. Evaluating their house and making sure it's safe for their needs Monitoring their ability to drive. You may want to hire a driving specialist who can test their driving skills. When it is no longer safe for your loved one to drive, you need to make sure that they stop. Encouraging your loved one to get some physical activity . Exercising together may make it more fun for them. Making sure that your loved one has a healthy diet Helping with daily tasks like bathing, eating, or taking medicine Doing housework and cooking Running errands such as shopping for food and clothes Driving them to appointments Providing company and emotional support Arranging medical care and making health decisions As you care for your loved one with AD, don't ignore your own needs. Caregiving can be stressful, and you need to take care of your own physical and mental health . At some point, you will not be able to do everything on your own. Make sure that you get help when you need it. There are many different services available, including: Home care services Adult day care services Respite services, which provide short-term care for the person with AD Federal and state government programs that can provide financial support and services Assisted living facilities Nursing homes , some of which have special memory care units for people with AD Palliative and hospice care You might consider hiring a geriatric care manager. They are specially trained professionals who can help you to find the right services for your needs. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia among older people. Dementia is a brain disorder that seriously affects a person's ability to carry out daily activities. AD begins slowly. It first involves the parts of the brain that control thought, memory and language. People with AD may have trouble remembering things that happened recently or names of people they know. A related problem, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), causes more memory problems than normal for people of the same age.  Many, but not all, people with MCI will develop AD. In AD, over time, symptoms get worse. People may not recognize family members. They may have trouble speaking, reading or writing. They may forget how to brush their teeth or comb their hair. Later on, they may become anxious or aggressive, or wander away from home. Eventually, they need total care. This can cause great stress for family members who must care for them. AD usually begins after age 60.  The risk goes up as you get older. Your risk is also higher if a family member has had the disease. No treatment can stop the disease. However, some drugs may help keep symptoms from getting worse for a limited time. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Angina is chest pain or discomfort you feel when there is not enough blood flow to your heart muscle. Your heart muscle needs the oxygen that the blood carries. Angina may feel like pressure or a squeezing pain in your chest. It may feel like indigestion. You may also feel pain in your shoulders, arms, neck, jaw, or back. Angina is a symptom of coronary artery disease (CAD), the most common heart disease . CAD happens when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply blood to the heart, reducing blood flow. There are three types of angina: Stable angina is the most common type. It happens when the heart is working harder than usual. Stable angina has a regular pattern.  Rest and medicines usually help. Unstable angina is the most dangerous. It does not follow a pattern and can happen without physical exertion. It does not go away with rest or medicine. It is a sign that you could have a heart attack soon. Variant angina is rare. It happens when you are resting. Medicines can help. Not all chest pain or discomfort is angina.  If you have chest pain, you should see your health care provider. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Assisted living is housing and services for people who need some help with daily care. They may need help with things like dressing, bathing, taking their medicines, and cleaning. But they do not need the medical care that a nursing home provides. Assisted living allows the residents to live more independently. Assisted living facilities sometimes have other names, such as adult care facilities or residential care facilities. They vary in size, with as few as 25 residents up to 120 residents or more. The residents usually live in their own apartments or rooms and share common areas. The facilities usually offer a few different levels of care. Residents pay more for the higher levels of care. The types of services they offer may be different from state to state. The services may include: Up to three meals a day Assistance with personal care, such as bathing, dressing, eating, getting in and out of bed or chairs, moving around, and using the bathroom Help with medicines Housekeeping Laundry 24-hour supervision, security, and on-site staff Social and recreational activities Transportation The residents are usually older adults, including those with Alzheimer's or other types of dementia . But in some cases, residents may be younger and have mental illnesses , developmental disabilities , or certain medical conditions. NIH: National Institute on Aging

If you have a disability or injury, you may use a number of assistive devices. These are tools, products or types of equipment that help you perform tasks and activities. They may help you move around, see, communicate, eat, or get dressed. Some are high-tech tools, such as computers. Others are much simpler, like a "reacher" - a tool that helps you grab an object you can't reach.

Have you ever felt dizzy , lightheaded, or as if the room is spinning around you? If the feeling happens often, it could be a sign of a balance problem. Balance problems can make you feel unsteady. You may also have blurred vision, confusion, and disorientation. They are one cause of falls and fall-related injuries, such as a hip fracture (broken hip). Some balance problems are due to problems in the inner ear. Others may involve another part of the body, such as the brain or the heart. Aging, infections, head injury, certain medicines, or problems with blood circulation may also cause balance problems. It is important to see your doctor about balance problems. They can be a sign of other health problems, such as an ear infection or a stroke. Your doctor may send you to a specialist for a diagnosis. You may need a hearing test, blood tests, or imaging studies of your head and brain. Other possible tests look at your eye movements, and how your body responds to movement. In some cases, treating the illness that is causing the disorder will help with the balance problem. Exercises, a change in diet, and some medicines also can help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

A cataract is a clouding of the lens in your eye.  It affects your vision.  Cataracts are very common in older people. By age 80, more than half of all Americans either have a cataract or have had cataract surgery. A cataract can occur in either or both eyes. It cannot spread from one eye to the other. Common symptoms are: Blurry vision Colors that seem faded Glare - headlights, lamps or sunlight may seem too bright. You may also see a halo around lights. Not being able to see well at night Double vision Frequent prescription changes in your eye wear Cataracts usually develop slowly. New glasses, brighter lighting, anti-glare sunglasses or magnifying lenses can help at first. Surgery is also an option. It involves removing the cloudy lens and replacing it with an artificial lens. Wearing sunglasses and a hat with a brim to block ultraviolet sunlight may help to delay cataracts. NIH: National Eye Institute

What is COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. Normally, the airways and air sacs in your lungs are elastic or stretchy. When you breathe in, the airways bring air to the air sacs. The air sacs fill up with air, like a small balloon. When you breathe out, the air sacs deflate, and the air goes out. If you have COPD, less air flows in and out of your airways because of one or more problems: The airways and air sacs in your lungs become less elastic The walls between many of the air sacs are destroyed The walls of the airways become thick and inflamed The airways make more mucus than usual and can become clogged What are the types of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? COPD includes two main types: Emphysema affects the air sacs in your lungs, as well as the walls between them. They become damaged and are less elastic. Chronic bronchitis , in which the lining of your airways is constantly irritated and inflamed. This causes the lining to swell and make mucus. Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. What causes COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? The cause of COPD is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause COPD, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to COPD. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing COPD. Who is at risk for COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? The risk factors for COPD include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have COPD smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace Age. Most people who have COPD are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get COPD are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. Asthma. People who have asthma have more risk of developing COPD than people who don't have asthma. But most people with asthma will not get COPD. What are the symptoms of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or a cough that produces a lot mucus Wheezing A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity Tightness in your chest Some people with COPD get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, COPD can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Various tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests Your doctor will diagnose COPD based on your signs and symptoms, your medical and family histories, and test results. What are the treatments for COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? There is no cure for COPD. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat COPD. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with COPD are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe COPD and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling Surgery , usually as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines: For COPD that is mainly related to emphysema, there are surgeries that Remove damaged lung tissue Remove large air spaces (bullae) that can form when air sacs are destroyed. The bullae can interfere with breathing. For severe COPD, some people may need lung transplant If you have COPD, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of COPD, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common type of heart disease. It is the leading cause of death in the United States in both men and women. CAD happens when the arteries that supply blood to heart muscle become hardened and narrowed. This is due to the buildup of cholesterol and other material, called plaque, on their inner walls. This buildup is called atherosclerosis . As it grows, less blood can flow through the arteries. As a result, the heart muscle can't get the blood or oxygen it needs. This can lead to chest pain ( angina ) or a heart attack .  Most heart attacks happen when a blood clot suddenly cuts off the hearts' blood supply, causing permanent heart damage. Over time, CAD can also weaken the heart muscle and contribute to heart failure and arrhythmias . Heart failure means the heart can't pump blood well to the rest of the body. Arrhythmias are changes in the normal beating rhythm of the heart. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is dementia? Dementia is a loss of mental functions that is severe enough to affect your daily life and activities. These functions include: Memory Language skills Visual perception (your ability to make sense of what you see) Problem solving Trouble with everyday tasks The ability to focus and pay attention It is normal to become a bit more forgetful as you age. But dementia is not a normal part of aging. It is a serious disorder which interferes with your daily life. What are the types of dementia? The most common types of dementia are known as neurodegenerative disorders. These are diseases in which the cells of the brain stop working or die. They include: Alzheimer's disease , which is the most common form of dementia among older people. People with Alzheimer's have plaques and tangles in their brain. These are abnormal buildups of different proteins. Beta-amyloid protein clumps up and forms plaques in between your brain cells. Tau protein builds up and forms tangles inside the nerve cells of your brain. There is also a loss of connection between nerve cells in the brain. Lewy body dementia , which causes movement symptoms along with dementia. Lewy bodies are abnormal deposits of a protein in the brain. Frontotemporal disorders, which cause changes to certain parts of the brain: Changes in the frontal lobe lead to behavioral symptoms Changes in the temporal lobe lead to language and emotional disorders Vascular dementia, which involves changes to the brain's blood supply. It is often caused by a stroke or atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) in the brain. Mixed dementia, which is a combination of two or more types of dementia. For example, some people have both Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Other conditions can cause dementia or dementia-like symptoms, including: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , a rare brain disorder Huntington's disease , an inherited, progressive brain disease Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), caused by repeated traumatic brain injury HIV-associated dementia (HAD) Who is at risk for dementia? Certain factors can raise your risk for developing dementia, including: Aging. This is the biggest risk factor for dementia. Smoking Uncontrolled diabetes High blood pressure Drinking too much alcohol Having close family members who have dementia What are the symptoms of dementia? The symptoms of dementia can vary, depending on which parts of the brain are affected. Often, forgetfulness is the first symptom.  Dementia also causes problems with the ability to think, problem solve, and reason. For example, people with dementia may: Get lost in a familiar neighborhood Use unusual words to refer to familiar objects Forget the name of a close family member or friend Forget old memories Need help doing tasks that they used to do by themselves Some people with dementia cannot control their emotions and their personalities may change. They may become apathetic, meaning that they are no longer interested in normal daily activities or events. They may lose their inhibitions and stop caring about other peoples' feelings. Certain types of dementia can also cause problems with balance and movement. The stages of dementia range from mild to severe. In the mildest stage, it is just beginning to affect a person's functioning. In the most severe stage, the person is completely dependent on others for care. How is dementia diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam Tests of your thinking, memory, and language abilities Other tests, such as blood tests, genetic tests , and brain scans A mental health evaluation to see whether a mental disorder is contributing to your symptoms What are the treatments for dementia? There is no cure for most types of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementia. Treatments may help to maintain mental function longer, manage behavioral symptoms, and slow down the symptoms of disease. They may include: Medicines may temporarily improve memory and thinking or slow down their decline. They only work in some people. Other medicines can treat symptoms such as anxiety, depression, sleep problems, and muscle stiffness. Some of these medicines can cause strong side effects in people with dementia. It is important to talk to your health care provider about which medicines will be safe for you. Occupational therapy to help find ways to more easily do everyday activities Speech therapy to help with swallowing difficulties and trouble speaking loudly and clearly Mental health counseling to help people with dementia and their families learn how to manage difficult emotions and behaviors. It can also help them plan for the future. Music or art therapy to reduce anxiety and improve well-being Can dementia be prevented? Researchers have not found a proven way to prevent dementia. Living a healthy lifestyle might influence some of your risk factors for dementia.

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy.  With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin.  With type 2 diabetes , the more common type, your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. You can also have prediabetes .  This means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes.  Having prediabetes puts you at a higher risk of getting type 2 diabetes. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious problems .    It can damage your eyes , kidneys , and nerves . Diabetes can also cause heart disease , stroke and even the need to remove a limb. Pregnant women can also get diabetes, called gestational diabetes . Blood tests can show if you have diabetes. One type of test, the A1C , can also check on how you are managing your diabetes. Exercise, weight control and sticking to your meal plan can help control your diabetes. You should also monitor your blood glucose level and take medicine if prescribed. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Many older people are victims of elder abuse. It is the mistreatment of an older person, usually by a caregiver. It can happen within the family.  It can also happen in assisted living facilities or nursing homes. The mistreatment may be: Physical, sexual, or emotional abuse Neglect or abandonment Financial abuse - stealing of money or belongings Possible signs of elder abuse include unexplained bruises, burns, and injuries. There may also be bed sores and poor hygiene. The person may become withdrawn, agitated, and depressed. There may be a sudden change in the person's financial situation. Elder abuse will not stop on its own. Someone else needs to step in and help. If you think that an older person is in urgent danger, call 911. Otherwise, contact adult protective services. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common type of male sexual dysfunction. It is when a man has trouble getting or keeping an erection. ED becomes more common as you get older.  But it's not a natural part of aging. Some people have trouble speaking with their doctors about sex. But if you have ED, you should tell your doctor. ED can be a sign of health problems. It may mean your blood vessels are clogged. It may mean you have nerve damage from diabetes. If you don't see your doctor, these problems will go untreated. Your doctor can offer several new treatments for ED. For many men, the answer is as simple as taking a pill. Getting more exercise, losing weight, or stopping smoking may also help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Exercise and physical activity are good for just about everyone, including older adults. There are four main types and each type is different. Doing them all will give you more benefits .: Endurance, or aerobic, activities increase your breathing and heart rate. Brisk walking or jogging, dancing, swimming, and biking are examples. Strength exercises make your muscles stronger. Lifting weights or using a resistance band can build strength. Balance exercises help prevent falls Flexibility exercises stretch your muscles and can help your body stay limber If you have not been active, you can start slowly and work up to your goal. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Check with your health care provider on what is right for you. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Falls can be dangerous at any age. Babies and young children can get hurt falling off furniture or down the stairs. Older children may fall off playground equipment. For older adults, falls can be especially serious. They are at higher risk of falling. They are also more likely to fracture (break) a bone when they fall, especially if they have osteoporosis . A broken bone, especially when it is in a hip , may even lead to disability and a loss of independence for older adults. Some common causes of falls include: Balance problems Some medicines, which can make you feel dizzy, confused, or slow Vision problems Alcohol, which can affect your balance and reflexes Muscle weakness, especially in your legs, which can make it harder for you to get up from a chair or keep your balance when walking on an uneven surface. Certain illnesses, such as low blood pressure , diabetes , and neuropathy Slow reflexes, which make it hard to keep your balance or move out of the way of a hazard Tripping or slipping due to loss of footing or traction At any age, people can make changes to lower their risk of falling. It important to take care of your health, including getting regular eye exams . Regular exercise may lower your risk of falls by strengthening your muscles, improving your balance, and keeping your bones strong. And you can look for ways to make your house safer. For example, you can get rid of tripping hazards and make sure that you have rails on the stairs and in the bath. To reduce the chances of breaking a bone if you do fall, make sure that you get enough calcium and vitamin D . NIH: National Institute on Aging

Glaucoma is a group of diseases that can damage the eye's optic nerve . It is a leading cause of blindness in the United States. It usually happens when the fluid pressure inside the eyes slowly rises, damaging the optic nerve. Often there are no symptoms at first. Without treatment, people with glaucoma will slowly lose their peripheral, or side vision. They seem to be looking through a tunnel. Over time, straight-ahead vision may decrease until no vision remains. A comprehensive eye exam can tell if you have glaucoma.  People at risk should get eye exams at least every two years.  They include: African Americans over age 40 People over age 60, especially Mexican Americans People with a family history of glaucoma There is no cure, but glaucoma can usually be controlled. Early treatment can help protect your eyes against vision loss. Treatments usually include prescription eyedrops and/or surgery. NIH: National Eye Institute

People in the U.S. are living longer, and the number of older adults in the population is growing. As we age, our minds and bodies change. Having a healthy lifestyle can help you deal with those changes. It may also prevent some health problems and  help you to make the most of your life. A healthy lifestyle for older adults includes: Healthy eating . As you age, your dietary needs may change. You may need fewer calories, but you still need to get enough nutrients. A healthy eating plan includes Eating foods that give you lots of nutrients without a lot of extra calories. This includes fruits and vegetables, whole grains, lean meats, low-fat dairy, nuts, and seeds. Avoiding empty calories, such as foods like chips, candy, baked goods, soda, and alcohol Eating foods that are low in cholesterol and fat Drinking enough liquids, so you don't get dehydrated Regular physical activity . Being physically active may help you maintain a healthy weight and avoid chronic health problems. If you have not been active, you can start slowly and work up to your goal. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Check with your health care provider on what is right for you. Staying at a healthy weight . Being either overweight or underweight can lead to health problems. Ask your health care professional what a healthy weight for you may be. Healthy eating and exercise can help you get to that weight. Keeping your mind active. Lots of activities can keep your mind active and improve your memory , including learning new skills, reading, and playing games. Making your mental health a priority. Work on improving your mental health , for example by practicing mediation, relaxation techniques, or gratitude. Know the warning signs of a problem and ask for help if you are struggling. Participating in activities that you enjoy. People who are involved in hobbies and social and leisure activities may be at lower risk for some health problems. Doing things that you enjoy may help you feel happier and improve your thinking abilities. Playing an active role in your health care. Make sure that you get regular checkups and the health screenings that you need. You should know which medicines you are taking, why you need them, and how to take them properly . Not smoking. If you are a smoker, quitting is one of the most important things that you can do for your health. It can lower your risk of several different types of cancer, certain lung diseases, and heart disease. Taking steps to prevent falls . Older adults have a higher risk of falling. They are also more likely to fracture (break) a bone when they fall. Getting regular eye checkups , getting regular physical activity, and making your house safer can lower your risk of falling. Following these tips can help you to stay healthy as you age. Even if you have never done them before, it's never too late to start taking care of your health. If you have questions about these lifestyle changes or need help figuring out how to make them, ask your health care provider.

It's frustrating to be unable to hear well enough to enjoy talking with friends or family. Hearing disorders make it hard, but not impossible, to hear. They can often be helped. Deafness can keep you from hearing sound at all. What causes hearing loss? Some possibilities are: Heredity Diseases such as ear infections and meningitis Trauma Certain medicines Long-term exposure to loud noise Aging There are two main types of hearing loss. One happens when your inner ear or auditory nerve is damaged. This type is usually permanent. The other kind happens when sound waves cannot reach your inner ear. Earwax buildup, fluid, or a punctured eardrum can cause it. Treatment or surgery can often reverse this kind of hearing loss. Untreated, hearing problems can get worse. If you have trouble hearing, you can get help. Possible treatments include hearing aids , cochlear implants , special training, certain medicines, and surgery. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

What is heart disease? Heart disease is a general term that includes many types of heart problems. It's also called cardiovascular disease, which means heart and blood vessel disease. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, but there are ways to prevent and manage many types of heart disease. What are the types of heart disease? There are many different types of heart disease. Some you may be born with, called congenital heart disease . Other types develop during your lifetime. Coronary artery disease (also called coronary heart disease) is the most common type of heart disease. It happens slowly over time when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. The plaque narrows or blocks blood flow to the heart muscle and can lead to other heart problems: Angina - chest pain from lack of blood flow Heart attacks - when part of the heart muscle dies from loss of blood flow Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat Other types of heart diseases may affect your heart valves or heart muscle ( cardiomyopathy ). What causes heart diseases? The causes of heart disease depend on the type of disease. Some possible causes include lifestyle, genetics, infections, medicines, and other diseases. Who is more likely to develop heart diseases? There are many different factors that can make you more likely to develop heart disease. Some of these factors you can change, but others you cannot. Age. Your risk of heart disease goes up as you get older. Sex. Some factors may affect heart disease risk differently in women than in men. Family history and genetics. A family history of early heart disease raises your risk of heart disease. And research has shown that some genes are linked to a higher risk of certain heart diseases. Race/ethnicity. Certain groups have higher risks than others. Lifestyle habits. Over time, unhealthy lifestyle habits can raise your risk heart disease: Eating a diet high in saturated fats , refined carbohydrates, and salt . Not getting enough physical activity . Drinking too much alcohol . Smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke . Too much stress . Having other medical conditions can raise your risk of heart diseases. These conditions include: High blood pressure . High cholesterol levels . Diabetes . Obesity . Autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Chronic kidney disease . Metabolic syndrome . What are the symptoms of heart disease? Your symptoms will depend on the type of heart disease you have. You may not have symptoms at first. In some cases, you may not know you have heart disease until you have a complication such as a heart attack. How are heart diseases diagnosed? To find out if you have heart disease, your health care provider will: Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had heart disease Do a physical exam Likely run heart tests and blood tests In some cases, your provider may refer you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for tests, diagnosis, and care. What are the treatments for heart disease? Treatment plans for heart disease depend on the type of heart disease you have, how serious your symptoms are, and what other health conditions you have. Possible treatments may include: Heart-healthy lifestyle changes Medicines Procedures or surgeries Cardiac rehabilitation Can heart diseases be prevented? You may be able to lower your risk of certain heart diseases by making heart-healthy lifestyle changes and managing any other medical conditions you have. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is heart failure? Heart failure means that your heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet your body's needs. Heart failure doesn't mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop beating. But without enough blood flow, your organs may not work well, which can cause serious problems. Heart failure can affect one or both sides of your heart: With right-sided heart failure , your heart is too weak to pump enough blood to your lungs to get oxygen. With left-sided heart failure , your heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood out to your body. This happens when the left side of your heart becomes either: Too weak to pump enough blood. Too thick or stiff to relax and fill with enough blood. Left-sided heart failure is more common than right-sided heart failure. What causes heart failure? Heart failure can start suddenly after a medical condition or injury damages your heart muscle. But in most cases, heart failure develops slowly from long-term medical conditions. Conditions that can cause heart failure include: Arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat) Cardiomyopathy Congenital heart defects or other types of heart diseases that you are born with Coronary artery disease Endocarditis Heart attack Heart valve diseases High blood pressure A blood clot in your lung Diabetes Certain severe lung diseases , such as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) Obesity Over time, left-sided heart failure can lead to right-sided heart failure. Who is more likely to develop heart failure? Heart failure can happen at any age. It happens to both men and women, but men often develop it at a younger age than women.  Your chance of developing heart failure increases if: You're 65 years old or older. Aging can weaken and stiffen your heart muscle. Your family health history includes relatives who have or have had heart failure. You have changes in your genes that affect your heart tissue. You have habits that can harm your heart , including: Smoking Eating foods high in fat , cholesterol , and sodium (salt) Having an inactive lifestyle Alcohol use disorder (AUD) Illegal drug use You have other medical conditions that can affect your heart , including: Any heart or blood vessel conditions, including high blood pressure Serious lung diseases Infection, such as HIV or COVID-19 Obesity Diabetes Sleep apnea Chronic kidney disease Anemia Iron overload disease Cancer treatments that can harm your heart, such as radiation and chemotherapy You are African American. African Americans are more likely to develop heart failure and have more serious cases at younger ages than people of other races. Factors such as stigma, discrimination, income, education, and geographic region can also affect their risk of heart failure. What are the symptoms of heart failure? The symptoms of heart failure depend on which side of your heart is affected and how serious your condition has become.  Most symptoms are caused by reduced blood flow to your organs and fluid buildup in your body. Fluid buildup happens because the flow of blood through your heart is too slow. As a result, blood backs up in the vessels that return the blood to your heart. Fluid may leak from the blood vessels and collect in the tissues of your body, causing swelling ( edema ) and other problems. Symptoms of heart failure may include: Feeling short of breath (like you can't get enough air) when you do things like climbing stairs. This may be one of the first symptoms you notice. Fatigue or weakness even after rest. Coughing . Swelling and weight gain from fluid in your ankles, lower legs, or abdomen (belly). Difficulty sleeping when lying flat. Nausea and loss of appetite. Swelling in the veins of your neck. Needing to urinate (pee) often . At first you may have no symptoms or mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms will usually bother you more. What other problems does heart failure cause? Fluid buildup and reduced blood flow to your organs can lead to serious problems, including: Breathing problems from fluid in and around your lungs (also called congestive heart failure) Kidney or liver damage including cirrhosis Malnutrition if fluid buildup makes eating uncomfortable or if your stomach doesn't get enough blood flow to digest food properly Other heart conditions , such as irregular heartbeat and sudden cardiac arrest Pulmonary hypertension How is heart failure diagnosed? To find out if you have heart failure, your doctor will: Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had heart failure Do a physical exam Will likely order heart tests and blood tests , including a brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) test In some cases, your doctor may refer you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for tests, diagnosis, and care. What are the treatments for heart failure? Your treatment will depend on the type of heart failure you have and how serious it is. There's no cure for heart failure. But treatment can help you live longer with fewer symptoms. Even with treatment, heart failure usually gets worse over time, so you'll likely need treatment for the rest of your life. Most treatment plans include: Taking medicine Eating less sodium and drinking less liquid to control fluid buildup Making other changes, such as quitting smoking , managing stress , and getting as much physical activity as your health care provider recommends Treating any conditions that may make heart failure worse You may need heart surgery if: You have a congenital heart defect or damage to your heart that can be fixed. The left side of your heart is getting weaker and putting a device in your chest could help. Devices include: An implantable cardioverter defibrillator . A biventricular pacemaker (cardiac resynchronization therapy). A mechanical heart pump (a ventricular assist device (VAD) or a total artificial heart). Your heart doctor recommends a heart transplant because your heart failure is life-threatening and nothing else is helping. As part of your treatment, you'll need to pay close attention to your symptoms, because heart failure can worsen suddenly. Your provider may suggest a cardiac rehabilitation program to help you learn how to manage your condition. Can heart failure be prevented? You may be able to prevent or delay heart failure if you: Work with your provider to manage any health conditions that increase your risk of developing heart failure Make healthy changes in your eating, exercise, and other daily habits to help prevent heart disease NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is blood pressure? Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is called diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually the systolic number comes before or above the diastolic number. For example, 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80. How is high blood pressure diagnosed? High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regular blood pressure checks from your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. They will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis. Blood Pressure Category Systolic Blood Pressure Diastolic Blood Pressure Normal Less than 120 and Less than 80 Elevated 120 - 129 and Less than 80 High Blood Pressure Stage 1 130 - 139 or 80 - 89 High Blood Pressure Stage 2 140 or higher or 90 or higher Hypertensive Crisis (dangerously high blood pressure - seek medical care right away) Higher than 180 and Higher than 120 For children and teens, the health care provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and sex. What are the different types of high blood pressure? There are two main types of high blood pressure: primary and secondary high blood pressure.: Primary, or essential, high blood pressure is the most common type of high blood pressure. For most people who get this kind of blood pressure, it develops over time as you get older. Secondary high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or use of certain medicines. It usually gets better after you treat that condition or stop taking the medicines that are causing it. Why do I need to worry about high blood pressure? When your blood pressure stays high over time, it causes the heart to pump harder and work overtime, possibly leading to serious health problems such as heart attack , stroke , heart failure , and kidney failure . What are the treatments for high blood pressure? Treatments for high blood pressure include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines . You will work with your provider to come up with a treatment plan. It may include only the lifestyle changes. These changes, such as heart-healthy eating and exercise, can be very effective. But sometimes the changes do not control or lower your high blood pressure. Then you may need to take medicine. There are different types of blood pressure medicines. Some people need to take more than one type. If your high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or medicine, treating that condition or stopping the medicine may lower your blood pressure. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Home care is care that allows a person with special needs to stay in their home. It might be for people who are getting older (aging in place). It could also be for people who are chronically ill, recovering from surgery, or have a disability . Home care services include: Personal care, such as help with bathing, washing your hair, or getting dressed Household chores, such as cleaning, yard work, and laundry Cooking for you in your home or delivering meals to you Money management, such as help filling out forms and making sure that your bills are paid on time Health care, such as having a home health aide come to your home or getting care from your provider through telehealth You can get almost any type of help you want in your home. You have to pay for many of them. But some types of care and community services are free or donated. Sometimes government programs or your health insurance will help cover the cost of certain home care services. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Macular degeneration, or age-related macular degeneration (AMD), is a leading cause of vision loss in Americans 60 and older. It is a disease that destroys your sharp, central vision. You need central vision to see objects clearly and to do tasks such as reading and driving. AMD affects the macula, the part of the eye that allows you to see fine detail. It does not hurt, but it causes cells in the macula to die. There are two types: wet and dry. Wet AMD happens when abnormal blood vessels grow under the macula. These new blood vessels often leak blood and fluid. Wet AMD damages the macula quickly. Blurred vision is a common early symptom. Dry AMD happens when the light-sensitive cells in the macula slowly break down. Your gradually lose your central vision. A common early symptom is that straight lines appear crooked. Regular comprehensive eye exams can detect macular degeneration before the disease causes vision loss. Treatment can slow vision loss. It does not restore vision. NIH: National Eye Institute

Medicare is the U.S. government's health insurance program for people age 65 or older. Some people under age 65 can qualify for Medicare, too. They include those with disabilities, permanent kidney failure, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Medicare helps with the cost of health care. It does not cover all medical expenses or the cost of most long-term care. The program has four parts: Part A is hospital insurance Part B helps pay for medical services that Part A doesn't cover Part C is called Medicare Advantage. If you have Parts A and B, you can choose this option to receive all of your health care through a provider organization, like an HMO. Part D is prescription drug coverage. It helps pay for some medicines.

Every day, you have different experiences and you learn new things. Your brain cannot store all of that information, so it has to decide what is worth remembering. Memory is the process of storing and then remembering this information. There are different types of memory. Short-term memory stores information for a few seconds or minutes. Long-term memory stores it for a longer period of time. Memory doesn't always work perfectly. As you grow older, it may take longer to remember things. It's normal to forget things once in a while. We've all forgotten a name, where we put our keys, or if we locked the front door. If you are an older adult who forget things more often than others your age, you may have mild cognitive impairment . Forgetting how to use your phone or find your way home may be signs of a more serious problem, such as: Alzheimer's disease Other types of dementia Stroke Depression Head injuries Blood clots or tumors in the brain Kidney , liver , or thyroid problems Reactions to certain medicines If you're worried about your forgetfulness, see your health care provider. NIH: National Institute on Aging

What is menopause? Menopause is the time in your life when you stop having your period and can no longer get pregnant. You have reached menopause when you have not had a period for 12 months. The time leading up to menopause is called the menopausal transition, or perimenopause. This transition usually begins in when you are in your 40s, but sometimes it can start earlier. It can last for several years. The most common age for reaching menopause is between 45 and 55 years old. What is early menopause? Early, or premature menopause happens when your ovaries stop making hormones and periods stop before age 40. This can happen on its own (with no known cause). It can also happen because of surgery to remove the ovaries or uterus . Medical treatments such as chemotherapy or hormone therapy to treat breast cancer may also cause early menopause. A condition called primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) happens when your ovaries stop working normally before you are age 40. But this condition is different from early menopause. If you have POI, you may still have periods, even though they might not come regularly. And you might still be able to get pregnant. What are the symptoms of menopause? During the menopausal transition, your ovaries start to make less of the estrogen and progesterone hormones. The changes in these hormones cause the symptoms of menopause, which can include: A change in your periods; they may be: Irregular, with more or less time in between periods. Shorter or longer. Lighter or heavier. Hot flashes, a sudden warm feeling in your face, neck, and chest. They may cause you to sweat . If they happen at night and cause sweating, they are called night sweats. Trouble sleeping , such as trouble falling asleep or getting back to sleep when you wake up. Over time, a lack of sleep can lead to fatigue and memory problems . Vaginal dryness, which may cause pain or discomfort during sexual intercourse. Mood changes, which can make you feel moody, anxious, or more irritable. Bladder issues, such as urinary incontinence (loss of bladder control) and urinary tract infections (UTIs). You may also have other physical changes which could put you at risk for certain diseases. For example, the loss of estrogen can: Cause you to lose bone density . This can lead to osteoporosis , a condition that causes bones to become weak and break easily. Raise your cholesterol levels and increase your risk of heart disease and stroke . What are the treatments for the symptoms of menopause? You may not need treatment for the symptoms of menopause. But if you do, there are several different types of treatments: Lifestyle changes You may find that you can manage your symptoms with lifestyle changes. Here are some changes that might make you feel better: If you have hot flashes, dress in layers that can be removed at the start of a hot flash. You may want to carry a portable fan to use when you get a hot flash. Avoid alcohol , spicy foods, and caffeine . They can make your menopause symptoms worse. If you smoke, try to quit , not only for hot flashes, but for your overall health. Try to maintain a healthy weight . Being overweight or having obesity can make hot flashes worse. Have good sleep habits . Keep your bedroom dark, quiet, and cool. Get regular exercise . It can help you sleep better, improve your mood, and help lower your risk for many age-related diseases. Lower stress , for example by using relaxation techniques such as meditation, deep breathing, and muscle relaxation exercises. If lifestyle changes are not enough to improve your symptoms, you may want to contact your health care provider. They will talk to you about your symptoms, family and medical history, and preferences. They also can explain the risks and benefits of the treatments. Non-hormone treatments There are various non-hormone treatments for menopause symptoms, such as: Medicines for hot flashes, including certain antidepressants , a medicine just for hot flashes, an antiseizure medicine, and a blood pressure medicine . Some of these medicines may also help with sleep problems. Medicines for urinary incontinence. Medicines to treat or help prevent osteoporosis. Low-dose birth control pills for very heavy bleeding or periods that are close together. Water-based lubricants to treat vaginal dryness. Medicines for painful intercourse that is caused by vaginal changes from menopause. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a type of talk therapy, for trouble sleeping. Hormone treatments Another treatment for menopause symptoms is menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). It may also be called hormone replacement therapy (HRT). This treatment is usually with estrogen or estrogen plus progestin (a type of progesterone that's made in a lab). MHT can be given in pills, skin patches, rings, implants, gels, or creams. It may be used to treat symptoms such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness and to help prevent osteoporosis. Like all medicines, MHT has benefits and risks. Talk with your provider about whether it is safe for you. If you decide to take MHT, your provider may recommend taking the lowest dose that works for the shortest time needed. Supplements, herbs, and "natural" hormone creams There are various products that are marketed for menopause symptoms. They include supplements , herbs , and over-the-counter "natural" hormone creams. There has been research on many of these products. So far, none of them has clearly been shown to be helpful. Also, there is little information on the long-term safety of these products. Some supplements can have harmful side effects or interact with medicines. Check with your provider before you take use any of them.

Some forgetfulness can be a normal part of aging.   However, some people have more memory problems than other people their age. This condition is called mild cognitive impairment, or MCI. People with MCI can take care of themselves and do their normal activities. MCI memory problems may include: Losing things often Forgetting to go to events and appointments Having more trouble coming up with words than other people of the same age Memory problems can also have other causes, including certain medicines and diseases that affect the blood vessels that supply the brain. Some of the problems brought on by these conditions can be managed or reversed. Your health care provider can do thinking, memory, and language tests to see if you have MCI. You may also need to see a specialist for more tests. Because MCI may be an early sign of Alzheimer's disease , it's really important to see your health care provider every 6 to 12 months. At this time, there is no proven drug treatment for MCI. Your health care provider can check to see if you have any changes in your memory or thinking skills over time. NIH: National Institute on Aging

A nursing home is a place for people who don't need to be in a hospital but can't be cared for at home. Most nursing homes have nursing aides and skilled nurses on hand 24 hours a day. Some nursing homes are set up like a hospital. The staff provides medical care, as well as physical, speech and occupational therapy. There might be a nurses' station on each floor. Other nursing homes try to be more like home. They try to have a neighborhood feel. Often, they don't have a fixed day-to-day schedule, and kitchens might be open to residents. Staff members are encouraged to develop relationships with residents. Some nursing homes have special care units for people with serious memory problems such as Alzheimer's disease . Some will let couples live together. Nursing homes are not only for older adults, but for anyone who requires 24-hour care. NIH: National Institute on Aging

What is nutrition and why is it important for older adults? Nutrition is about eating a healthy and balanced diet so your body gets the nutrients that it needs. Nutrients are substances in foods that our bodies need so they can function and grow. They include carbohydrates , fats , proteins , vitamins , minerals , and water. Good nutrition is important, no matter what your age. It gives you energy and can help you control your weight. It may also help prevent some diseases, such as osteoporosis , high blood pressure , heart disease , type 2 diabetes , and certain cancers. But as you age, your body and life change, and so does what you need to stay healthy. For example, you may need fewer calories, but you still need to get enough nutrients. Some older adults need more protein. What can make it harder for me to eat healthy as I age? Some changes that can happen as you age can make it harder for you to eat healthy. These include changes in your: Home life, such as suddenly living alone or having trouble getting around Health, which can make it harder for you to cook or feed yourself Medicines, which can change how food tastes, make your mouth dry, or take away your appetite Income, which means that you may not have as much money for food Sense of smell and taste Problems chewing or swallowing your food How can I eat healthy as I age? To stay healthy as you age, you should: Eat foods that give you lots of nutrients without a lot of extra calories , such as Fruits and vegetables (choose different types with bright colors) Whole grains, like oatmeal, whole-wheat bread, and brown rice Fat-free or low-fat milk and cheese, or soy or rice milk that has added vitamin D and calcium Seafood, lean meats, poultry, and eggs Beans, nuts, and seeds Avoid empty calories. These are foods with lots of calories but few nutrients, such as chips, candy, baked goods, soda, and alcohol. Pick foods that are low in cholesterol and fat. You especially want to try to avoid saturated and trans fats. Saturated fats are usually fats that come from animals. Trans fats are processed fats in stick margarine and vegetable shortening. You may find them in some store-bought baked goods and fried foods at some fast-food restaurants. Drink enough liquids , so you don't get dehydrated . Some people lose their sense of thirst as they age. And certain medicines might make it even more important to have plenty of fluids. Be physically active. If you have started losing your appetite, exercising may help you to feel hungrier. What can I do if I am having trouble eating healthy? Sometimes health issues or other problems can make it hard to eat healthy. Here are some tips that might help: If you are tired of eating alone, try organizing some potluck meals or cooking with a friend. You can also look into having some meals at a nearby senior center, community center, or religious facility. If you are having trouble chewing, see your dentist to check for problems If you are having trouble swallowing, try drinking plenty of liquids with your meal. If that does not help, check with your health care provider. A health condition or medicine could be causing the problem. If you're having trouble smelling and tasting your food, try adding color and texture to make your food more interesting If you aren't eating enough, add some healthy snacks throughout the day to help you get more nutrients and calories If an illness is making it harder for you to cook or feed yourself, check with your health care provider. He or she may recommend an occupational therapist, who can help you find ways to make it easier. NIH: National Institute on Aging

People in the U.S. are living longer than ever before. Many older adults live active and healthy lives. But there's no getting around one thing: as we age, our bodies and minds change. You need to know what to expect. Some changes may just be part of normal aging, while others may be a warning sign of a medical problem. It is important to know the difference, and to let your health care provider know if you have any concerns. Having a healthy lifestyle can help you to deal with normal aging changes and make the most of your life. This includes healthy eating , regular physical activity , and making mental health a priority.

Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, including as we age. Many older adults are at risk for mental health problems. But this does not mean that mental health problems are a normal part of aging. Studies show that most older adults feel satisfied with their lives, even though they may have more illnesses or physical problems. Sometimes, however, important life changes can make you feel uneasy, stressed, and sad. These changes could include the death of a loved one, retirement, or dealing with a serious illness. Many older adults will eventually adjust to the changes. But some people will have more trouble adjusting. This can put them at risk for mental disorders such as depression and anxiety . It's important to recognize and treat mental disorders in older adults. These disorders don't just cause mental suffering. They can also make it harder for you to manage other health problems. This is especially true if those health problems are chronic. Some of the warning signs of mental disorders in older adults include: Changes in mood or energy level A change in your eating or sleeping habits Withdrawing from the people and activities you enjoy Feeling unusually confused, forgetful, angry, upset, worried, or scared Feeling numb or like nothing matters Having unexplained aches and pains Feeling sadness or hopelessness Smoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usual Anger, irritability, or aggressiveness Having thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your head Hearing voices or believing things that are not true Thinking of harming yourself or others If you think that you may have a mental health problem, get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders. If you don't know where to start, contact your primary care provider.

What is osteoarthritis? Osteoarthritis, sometimes called OA, is a type of arthritis that only affects the joints, usually in the hands, knees, hips, neck, and lower back. It's the most common type of arthritis. In a healthy joint, the ends of the bones are covered with a smooth, slippery tissue called cartilage. The cartilage pads the bones and helps them glide easily when you move the joint. With osteoarthritis, the cartilage breaks down and becomes rough. Sometimes, all the cartilage wears away and the bones rub together. Bumps of extra bone called bone spurs may grow in the joint area. There is no cure for osteoarthritis. It usually gets worse slowly. But there's a lot you can do to manage the symptoms. What are the symptoms of osteoarthritis? Osteoarthritis affects people in different ways, and not everyone has pain. The most common symptoms are: Pain when you move, which often gets better with rest Stiffness, especially for the first 30 minutes after you get up from resting Swollen joints, especially after using the joint a lot Less movement in the joint than normal A joint that feels loose or unstable What causes osteoarthritis? Researchers aren't sure what causes osteoarthritis. They think that it could be caused by a combination of factors in the body and the environment. Your chance of developing osteoarthritis increases with age. They also know that some people are more likely to develop it than others. Who is more likely to develop osteoarthritis? Things that make you more likely to develop osteoarthritis include: Aging. Osteoarthritis can happen at any age, but the chance of getting it increases in middle-aged adults and older. After age 50, it is more common in women than in men. Being overweight. Extra weight puts more stress on your joints. Having a past injury or surgery on a joint. This is often the cause of osteoarthritis in younger adults. Doing a lot of activities that overuse the joint. This includes sports with a lot of jumping, twisting, running, or throwing. Having a joint that doesn't line up correctly. A family history of osteoarthritis. Some people inherit genetic changes that increase their chance of developing osteoarthritis. How is osteoarthritis diagnosed? There is no specific test for osteoarthritis. To find out if you have osteoarthritis, your provider: Will ask about your symptoms and medical history Will do a physical exam May use x-rays or other imaging tests to look at your joints May order lab tests to make sure that a different problem isn't causing your symptoms What are the treatments for osteoarthritis? The goal of treating osteoarthritis is to ease your pain, help you move better, and stop it from getting worse. Treatment usually begins with: Exercises to improve strength, flexibility and balance Weight loss, if needed, to improve pain, especially in your hips or knees Braces or shoe inserts (orthotics) that a health care provider fits for you You can buy some pain relievers and arthritis creams without a prescription. They can be helpful, but it's best to talk to your provider about using them. If they don't help enough, your provider may prescribe injections (shots) into the joint or prescription pain relievers. Complementary therapies may help some people. Massage can increase blood flow and bring warmth to the area. Some research shows that acupuncture may help relieve osteoarthritis pain. Simple things like heat and ice can help, too. If none of these treatments help enough, surgery may be an option. You and your provider can decide if it's right for you. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is osteoporosis? Osteoporosis is a disease in which your bones become weak and are likely to fracture (break). The disease can develop when your bone mineral density and bone mass decrease. It can also happen if the structure and strength of your bones change. Osteoporosis is called a "silent" disease because it doesn't usually cause symptoms. You may not even know you have the disease until you break a bone. This could happen with any bone, but it's most common in the bones of your hip, vertebrae in the spine, and wrist. What causes osteoporosis? Your bones are made of living tissue. To keep them strong, your body breaks down old bone and replaces it with new bone. Osteoporosis develops when more bone is broken down than replaced. You lose bone mass and changes happen in the structure of your bone tissue. This can happen as you get older. Other risk factors can also lead to the development of osteoporosis or increase your chance of developing the disease. Who is more likely to develop osteoporosis? Anyone can develop osteoporosis, but you are more likely to develop it if you have one or more of risk factors: Your sex. Osteoporosis is more common in women. Your age. Your risk increases as you get older. It is most common in people over age 50. Your body size. It is more common in people who are slim and thin boned. Your race: White and Asian women are at highest risk. African American and Mexican American women have a lower risk. White men are at higher risk than African American and Mexican American men. Family history. Your risk of osteoporosis may be higher if one of your parents has osteoporosis or broke their hip. Changes to hormones . Low levels of certain hormones can increase your chance of developing osteoporosis. Diet. A diet that is low in calcium and/or vitamin D or does not include enough protein can raise your risk. Long-term use of certain medicines , such as: Corticosteroids Proton pump inhibitors (which treat GERD ) Medicines to treat epilepsy Having other medical conditions , such as: Endocrine diseases Certain digestive diseases Rheumatoid arthritis Certain types of cancer HIV Anorexia nervosa, a type of eating disorder Your lifestyle. Certain lifestyle factors can contribute to bone loss, such as: Smoking tobacco Long-term heavy alcohol use Physical inactivity or prolonged periods of bedrest What are the symptoms of osteoporosis? Osteoporosis usually doesn't cause symptoms. You may not know that you have it until you break a bone. How is osteoporosis diagnosed? Health care providers usually diagnose osteoporosis during routine screening for the disease. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for: Women over age 65 Women of any age who have factors that increase the chance of developing osteoporosis The Task Force does not recommend regular screening for men. To find out if you have osteoporosis, your provider: Will ask about your medical history and whether you have ever broken a bone May do a physical exam, which could include checking for: A loss of height and/or weight Changes in your posture Balance and gait (the way you walk) Your muscle strength Will likely order a bone density scan What are the treatments for osteoporosis? The goals for treating osteoporosis are to slow or stop bone loss and to prevent fractures. Your provider may recommend: A healthy, balanced diet that includes enough calcium, vitamin D, and protein Lifestyle changes such as quitting smoking and limiting alcohol Regular physical activity Fall prevention to help prevent fractures Medicines, such as: Medicines that slow down bone loss Medicines that help rebuild bone In addition to managing your osteoporosis, it's important to avoid activities that may cause a fracture. These can include movements that involve: Twisting your spine, like swinging a golf club Bending forward from the waist, like sit ups and toe touches You can also help reduce the risk of breaking a bone by preventing falls. Can osteoporosis be prevented? To help keep bones strong and help prevent osteoporosis, the best thing to do is to eat a healthy diet rich in calcium and vitamin D. Getting regular physical activity, limiting alcohol, and not smoking can also help. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a type of movement disorder . It happens when nerve cells in the brain don't produce enough of a brain chemical called dopamine. Sometimes it is genetic, but most cases do not seem to run in families. Exposure to chemicals in the environment might play a role. Symptoms begin gradually, often on one side of the body.  Later they affect both sides. They  include: Trembling of hands, arms, legs, jaw and face Stiffness of the arms, legs and trunk Slowness of movement Poor balance and coordination As symptoms get worse, people with the disease may have trouble walking, talking, or doing simple tasks. They may also have problems such as depression, sleep problems, or trouble chewing, swallowing, or speaking. There is no specific test for PD, so it can be difficult to diagnose.  Doctors use a medical history and a neurological examination to diagnose it. PD usually begins around age 60, but it can start earlier. It is more common in men than in women. There is no cure for PD. A variety of medicines sometimes help symptoms dramatically. Surgery and deep brain stimulation (DBS) can help severe cases. With DBS, electrodes are surgically implanted in the brain. They send electrical pulses to stimulate the parts of the brain that control movement. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is prostate cancer? Cancer is a disease in which cells in the body grow out of control. Prostate cancer begins in the cells of the prostate. The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. Prostate cancer is one of the most common types of cancer. It often grows very slowly. If it does not spread to other parts of the body, it may not cause serious problems. But sometimes prostate cancer can grow quickly and spread to other parts of the body. This kind of prostate cancer is serious. What causes prostate cancer? Researchers don't know for sure what causes prostate cancer. They do know that it happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA). Sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. There are also certain genetic changes that happen during your lifetime that can raise your risk of prostate cancer. But often the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Who is more likely to develop prostate cancer? Anyone who has a prostate can develop prostate cancer. But certain factors can make you more likely to develop it: Age. Your chance of developing prostate cancer increases as you get older. Prostate cancer is rare in people under age 50. Family health history. Your risk of prostate cancer is higher if you have a parent, sibling, or child who has or has had prostate cancer. Race. African Americans are more likely to get prostate cancer.  They're also more likely to: Get prostate cancer at a younger age. Have more serious prostate cancer. Die from prostate cancer. What are the symptoms of prostate cancer? Prostate cancer doesn't always cause symptoms, especially at first. If it does cause symptoms, they may include: Problems urinating (peeing), such as: A urine stream that's weak, hard to start, or starts and stops Suddenly needing to urinate right away Urinating often, especially at night Pain or burning when urinating Blood in your urine or semen Pain in your lower back , hips, or pelvis that does not go away Painful ejaculation (the release of semen through the penis during orgasm) But many of these symptoms may be from other common prostate problems that aren't cancer, such as an enlarged prostate . You should discuss your prostate health with your health care provider if you: Have symptoms that could be prostate cancer Have a high risk for developing prostate cancer Had a screening test that suggests you could have prostate cancer What are prostate tests and how is prostate cancer diagnosed? Tests which check for prostate cancer include: A digital rectal exam (DRE). In this exam, your provider feels your prostate for lumps or anything unusual by inserting a lubricated, gloved finger into your rectum. A prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test. A high PSA blood level may be a sign of prostate cancer. But many other things can cause high PSA levels, too. Imaging tests. These tests may use ultrasound or MRI to make pictures of your prostate. If these tests show that you might have prostate cancer, the next step is usually a prostate biopsy . A biopsy is the only way to diagnose prostate cancer. During a biopsy, a doctor uses a hollow needle to remove some prostate tissue. The tissue is studied under a microscope to look for cancer cells. What are the treatments for prostate cancer? Your treatment options usually depend on your age, your general health, and how serious the cancer is. Your treatment may include one or more of options: Observation ,which is mostly used if you are older, your prostate cancer isn't likely to grow quickly, and you don't have symptoms or you have other medical conditions. Your doctor will keep checking on your cancer over time so to see whether you will need to start treatment for the cancer. There are two types of observation: Watchful waiting means having little or no testing. If symptoms begin or change, you will get treatment to relieve them, but not to treat the cancer. Active surveillance means having regular tests to see if your prostate cancer has changed. If the tests show the cancer is starting to grow or if you develop symptoms, then you will have treatment to try to cure the cancer. Surgery to remove your prostate gland may be an option if your cancer hasn't spread outside of your prostate. Radiation therapy uses high energy to kill cancer cells or prevent them from growing. Hormone therapy blocks cancer cells from getting the hormones they need to grow. It may include taking medicines or having surgery to remove the testicles. Chemotherapy uses medicines to kill cancer cells, slow their growth, or stop them from spreading. You might take the drugs by mouth, as an injection (shot), as a cream, or intravenously (by IV). Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells. This treatment causes less harm to healthy cells than radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Immunotherapy helps your own immune system to fight cancer. Can prostate cancer be prevented? Making healthy lifestyle changes may help to prevent some prostate cancers. These changes include: Being at a healthy weight Quitting smoking Getting enough exercise Eating healthy foods NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is the prostate? The prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. It lies just below the bladder. It makes fluid that is part of semen. What are prostate diseases? There are many types of prostate diseases: Prostatitis is inflammation (swelling and pain) in the prostate gland. It's the most common type of prostate problem in people under than age 50. There are different types: Chronic prostatitis is also called chronic pelvic pain syndrome. It's the most common type of prostatitis. Acute bacterial prostatitis starts suddenly from a bacterial infection and is treated with antibiotics . It is not common. Chronic bacterial prostatitis happens when a bacterial infection keeps coming back. The symptoms usually start slowly. It may take longer to treat than acute bacterial prostatitis. Asymptomatic prostatitis has no symptoms and usually doesn't need treatment. You may learn you have it after having tests for other health problems. Enlarged prostate is also called benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) . The prostate gland tends to grow larger with age. That's why enlarged prostate is very common in older people and rare in those who are under age 40. When the prostate grows larger, it may press on your urethra and cause problems with urination . Prostate cancer happens when cancer cells form in the prostate gland. Prostate cancer is a common type of cancer in those aged 50 and older. Most prostate cancers grow slowly and may never cause health problems. But certain prostate cancers are serious. Who is more likely to develop prostate diseases? Anyone with a prostate can develop prostate problems. But some people are at higher risk. You may be more likely to develop prostatitis if you have: A lower urinary tract infection , also called a UTI. An infection in your lower urinary tract (bladder and urethra) may lead to acute or chronic bacterial prostatitis. Nerve damage in your lower urinary tract from surgery or an injury. This may lead to chronic prostatitis. Emotional stress , which can lead to chronic prostatitis. You may be more likely to develop an enlarged prostate (BPH) if you: Are age 40 or older. Have family members who have had BPH. Have certain health conditions such as: Obesity . Heart disease and problems with blood circulation . Type 2 diabetes . Don't get enough physical activity . You may be more likely to develop prostate cancer if you: Are older than age 50. Have a parent, sibling, or child who has or had prostate cancer. Are African American. What are the symptoms of prostate diseases? The symptoms of prostate problems include: Needing to urinate a lot . Needing to rush to the bathroom, but not being able to urinate or only going a little. Leaking or dribbling urine . Having a weak urine stream. Other symptoms depend on the type of prostate problem you have and may include: Not being able to urinate at all. This is a medical emergency. Any problems, starting or controlling urine flow. Waking up often to urinate. Blood in your urine or urine that has an unusual smell or color. Fever , chills, or body aches. Great discomfort or pain: While urinating or after ejaculation. In your abdomen (belly), between your scrotum and anus, or in your scrotum or penis. Contact your provider if you have any of these symptoms. How are prostate diseases diagnosed? To find out if you have a prostate problem, your provider will: Ask about your medical history and symptoms. Ask about your family health history. Do a physical exam. The exam may include a digital rectal exam (DRE) of your prostate. In a DRE, your provider inserts a gloved finger into your rectum to feel the general size and condition of your prostate. Order tests, if needed. Tests may include: Blood and urine tests to look for infection. Urodynamic testing to see how well you can hold and release urine. Cystoscopy to look inside your urethra and bladder . Ultrasound pictures of your prostate and urinary tract. A PSA blood test (prostate-specific antigen test). Prostate biopsy to diagnose or rule out cancer. Treatment depends on what prostate disease you have and which symptoms bother you most. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is shingles? Shingles (herpes zoster) is an infection that causes a painful rash. It is caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). This is the same virus that causes chickenpox . After you have chickenpox, the virus stays in your body. It may not cause problems for many years. But as you get older, the virus may become active again and cause shingles. Is shingles contagious? Shingles is not contagious. You cannot get shingles from someone else. But you can catch chickenpox from someone with shingles if you have direct contact with fluid from their shingles rash. The risk of spreading the virus is low if the shingles rash is kept covered. People with shingles cannot spread the virus before their rash blisters appear or after the rash crusts. Who is at risk for shingles? Anyone who has had chickenpox can get shingles. But the risk of shingles goes up as you get older. Shingles is most common in people over age 50. People with weakened immune systems are at higher risk of getting shingles. This includes those who: Have immune system diseases such as HIV Have certain cancers Take medicines that weaken their immune system, such as steroids and medicines you take after organ transplant Your immune system may be weaker when you have an infection or are stressed. This can raise your risk of shingles. It is rare, but possible, to get shingles more than once. What are the symptoms of shingles? Early signs of shingles include burning or shooting pain and tingling or itching. It is usually on one side of the body or face. The pain can be mild to severe. Up to several days later, you will get a rash. It consists of blisters that typically scab over in 7 to 10 days. The rash is usually a single stripe around either the left or the right side of the body. In other cases, the rash is only on one side of the face. In rare cases (usually among people with weakened immune systems), the rash may be more widespread. It might look similar to a chickenpox rash. Some people may also have other symptoms: Fever Headache Chills Upset stomach What other problems can shingles cause? Shingles can cause other problems (complications): Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is most common complication of shingles. It causes severe pain in the areas where you had the shingles rash. It usually gets better in a few weeks or months. But some people can have pain from PHN for many years, and it can interfere with daily life. Vision loss can happen if shingles affects your eye. It may be temporary or permanent. Hearing or balance problems are possible if you have shingles within or near your ear. You may also have weakness of the muscles on that side of your face. These problems can be temporary or permanent. Very rarely, shingles can also lead to pneumonia , brain inflammation ( encephalitis ), or death. How is shingles diagnosed? Usually your health care provider can diagnose shingles by taking your medical history and looking at your rash. In some cases, your provider may scrap off tissue from the rash or swab some fluid from the blisters and send the sample to a lab for testing. What are the treatments for shingles? There is no cure for shingles. Antiviral medicines may help to make the attack shorter and less severe. They may also help prevent PHN. The medicines are most effective if you can take them within 3 days after the rash appears. So if you think you might have shingles, contact your provider as soon as possible. Pain relievers may also help with the pain. A cool washcloth, calamine lotion, and oatmeal baths may help relieve some of the itching. Can shingles be prevented? There is a vaccine, called Shingrix, to help prevent shingles and its complications. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that healthy adults 50 years and older get the vaccine. Your provider might also recommend the vaccine if you are over 19 and have a weakened immune system. The vaccine is given in two doses. If you have shingles, you can help prevent spreading the virus to others by: Staying away from: People with weakened immune systems People who have not had chickenpox or the chickenpox vaccine, especially if they are pregnant Premature or low birth weight babies Keeping the rash covered Not touching or scratching the rash Washing your hands often Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Sinusitis means your sinuses are inflamed. The cause can be an infection or another problem. Your sinuses are hollow air spaces within the bones surrounding the nose. They produce mucus, which drains into the nose.  If your nose is swollen, this can block the sinuses and cause pain. There are several types of sinusitis, including: Acute, which lasts up to 4 weeks Subacute, which lasts 4 to 12 weeks Chronic, which lasts more than 12 weeks and can continue for months or even years Recurrent, with several attacks within a year Acute sinusitis often starts as a cold, which then turns into a bacterial infection.  Allergies, nasal problems, and certain diseases can also cause acute and chronic sinusitis. Symptoms of sinusitis can include fever, weakness, fatigue, cough, and congestion. There may also be mucus drainage in the back of the throat, called postnasal drip. Your health care professional diagnoses sinusitis based on your symptoms and an examination of your nose and face. You may also need imaging tests. Treatments include antibiotics, decongestants, and pain relievers. Using heat pads on the inflamed area, saline nasal sprays, and vaporizers can also help.

Your skin changes as you age. You might notice wrinkles, age spots and dryness. Your skin also becomes thinner and loses fat, making it less plump and smooth. It might take longer to heal, too. Sunlight is a major cause of skin aging. You can protect yourself by staying out of the sun when it is strongest, using sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or higher, wearing protective clothing, and avoiding sunlamps and tanning beds. Cigarette smoking also contributes to wrinkles. The wrinkling increases with the amount of cigarettes and number of years a person has smoked. Many products claim to revitalize aging skin or reduce wrinkles, but the Food and Drug Administration has approved only a few for sun-damaged or aging skin. Various treatments soothe dry skin and reduce the appearance of age spots. NIH: National Institute on Aging

What is a stroke? A stroke happens when there is a loss of blood flow to part of the brain. Your brain cells cannot get the oxygen and nutrients they need from blood, and they start to die within a few minutes. This can cause lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death. If you think that you or someone else is having a stroke, call 911 right away. Immediate treatment may save someone's life and increase the chances for successful rehabilitation and recovery. What are the types of stroke? There are two types of stroke: Ischemic stroke is caused by a blood clot that blocks or plugs a blood vessel in the brain. This is the most common type; about 80% of strokes are ischemic. Hemorrhagic stroke is caused by a blood vessel that breaks and bleeds into the brain Another condition that's similar to a stroke is a transient ischemic attack (TIA). It's sometimes called a "mini-stroke." TIAs happen when the blood supply to the brain is blocked for a short time. The damage to the brain cells isn't permanent, but if you have had a TIA, you are at a much higher risk of having a stroke. Who is at risk for a stroke? Certain factors can raise your risk of a stroke. The major risk factors include: High blood pressure . This is the primary risk factor for a stroke. Diabetes . Heart diseases . Atrial fibrillation and other heart diseases can cause blood clots that lead to stroke. Smoking . When you smoke, you damage your blood vessels and raise your blood pressure. A personal or family history of stroke or TIA. Age. Your risk of stroke increases as you get older. Race and ethnicity. African Americans have a higher risk of stroke. There are also other factors that are linked to a higher risk of stroke, such as: Alcohol and illegal drug use Not getting enough physical activity High cholesterol Unhealthy diet Having obesity What are the symptoms of stroke? The symptoms of stroke often happen quickly. They include: Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm, or leg (especially on one side of the body) Sudden confusion, trouble speaking, or understanding speech Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes Sudden difficulty walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination Sudden severe headache with no known cause If you think that you or someone else is having a stroke, call 911 right away. How are strokes diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will: Ask about your symptoms and medical history Do a physical exam, including a check of Your mental alertness Your coordination and balance Any numbness or weakness in your face, arms, and legs Any trouble speaking and seeing clearly Run some tests, which may include Diagnostic imaging of the brain, such as a CT scan or MRI Heart tests , which can help detect heart problems or blood clots that may have led to a stroke. Possible tests include an electrocardiogram (EKG) and an echocardiography. What are the treatments for stroke? Treatments for stroke include medicines, surgery, and rehabilitation. Which treatments you get depend on the type of stroke and the stage of treatment. The different stages are: Acute treatment , to try to stop a stroke while it is happening Post-stroke rehabilitation , to overcome the disabilities caused by the stroke Prevention , to prevent a first stroke or, if you have already had one, prevent another stroke Acute treatments for ischemic stroke are usually medicines: You may get tPA, (tissue plasminogen activator), a medicine to dissolve the blood clot. You can only get this medicine within 4 hours of when your symptoms started. The sooner you can get it, the better your chance of recovery. If you cannot get that medicine, you may get medicine that helps stop platelets from clumping together to form blood clots. Or you may get a blood thinner to keep existing clots from getting bigger. If you have carotid artery disease, you may also need a procedure to open your blocked carotid artery Acute treatments for hemorrhagic stroke focus on stopping the bleeding. The first step is to find the cause of bleeding in the brain. The next step is to control it: If high blood pressure is the cause of bleeding, you may be given blood pressure medicines . If an aneurysm if the cause, you may need aneurysm clipping or coil embolization. These are surgeries to prevent further leaking of blood from the aneurysm. It also can help prevent the aneurysm from bursting again. If an arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is the cause of a stroke, you may need an AVM repair. An AVM is a tangle of faulty arteries and veins that can rupture within the brain. An AVM repair may be done through Surgery Injecting a substance into the blood vessels of the AVM to block blood flow Radiation to shrink the blood vessels of the AVM Stroke rehabilitation can help you relearn skills you lost because of the damage. The goal is to help you become as independent as possible and to have the best possible quality of life. Prevention of another stroke is also important, since having a stroke increases the risk of getting another one. Prevention may include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines. Can strokes be prevented? If you have already had a stroke or are at risk of having a stroke, you can make some heart-healthy lifestyle changes to try to prevent a future stroke: Eating a heart-healthy diet Aiming for a healthy weight Managing stress Getting regular physical activity Quitting smoking Managing your blood pressure and cholesterol levels If these changes aren't enough, you may need medicine to control your risk factors. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Our senses of taste and smell give us great pleasure. Taste helps us enjoy food and beverages. Smell lets us enjoy the scents and fragrances like roses or coffee. Taste and smell also protect us, letting us know when food has gone bad or when there is a gas leak. They make us want to eat, ensuring we get the nutrition we need. People with taste disorders may taste things that aren't there, may not be able to tell the difference in tastes, or can't taste at all. People with smell disorders may lose their sense of smell, or things may smell different.  A smell they once enjoyed may now smell bad to them. Many illnesses and injuries can cause taste and smell disorders, including colds and head injuries. Some drugs can also affect taste and smell. Most people lose some ability to taste and smell as they get older. Treatment varies, depending on the problem and its cause. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

What is a tremor? A tremor is a neurological condition that includes shaking or trembling movements in one or more parts of your body. It most often affects the hands. But it can also affect the arms, legs, head, vocal cords, and torso (trunk). A tremor is involuntary, meaning that you cannot control it. It happens because of muscle contractions. A tremor may come and go, or it may be constant. It can happen on its own or be caused by another disorder. It is not life threatening, but it may cause challenges. It can make it hard to do daily life tasks such as writing, typing, eating, and dressing. In some cases, a tremor can even lead to disabilities . What are the types of tremor? There are several types of tremor, including: Essential tremor , sometimes called benign essential tremor or familial tremor. This is the most common type. It usually affects both your hands and arms while you are moving them. It can also affect your head, voice, or legs. Parkinsonian tremor , which is a common symptom in people who have Parkinson's disease . It usually affects one or both hands when they are at rest, but it can affect the chin, lips, face, and legs. Dystonic tremor , which happens in people who have dystonia . Dystonia is a movement disorder in which you have involuntary muscle contractions. The contractions cause you to have twisting and repetitive movements. It can affect any muscle in the body. What causes tremor? Generally, tremor is caused by a problem in the deep parts of the brain that control movements. For most types, the cause is unknown. Some types are inherited and run in families. There can also be other causes, such as: Neurologic disorders, including multiple sclerosis , Parkinson's disease, stroke , and traumatic brain injury Certain medicines, such as asthma medicines, chemotherapy , corticosteroids , and medicines used for certain psychiatric and neurological disorders Alcohol use disorder (AUD) or alcohol withdrawal Poisoning from certain toxic substances, including pesticides and heavy metals such as mercury and lead Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) Liver or kidney failure Anxiety or panic Too much caffeine Who is at risk for tremor? Anyone can get tremor, but it is most common in middle-aged and older adults. For certain types of tremor, having a family history raises your risk of getting it. What are the symptoms of tremor? Symptoms of tremor may include: Rhythmic shaking in the hands, arms, head, legs, or torso Shaky voice Difficulty writing or drawing Problems holding and controlling utensils, such as a spoon How is tremor diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam, which includes checking: Whether the tremor happens when the muscles are at rest or in action The location of the tremor How often you have the tremor and how strong it is A neurological exam, including checking for: Problems with balance Problems with speech Increased muscle stiffness Blood or urine tests to look for the cause Imaging tests to help figure out if the cause is damage to your brain Tests that check your abilities to do daily tasks such as handwriting and holding a fork or cup An electromyogram , a test that measures involuntary muscle activity and how your muscles respond to nerve stimulation What are the treatments for tremor? There is no cure for most forms of tremor, but there are treatments to help manage symptoms. In some cases, the symptoms may be so mild that you do not need treatment. Finding the right treatment depends on getting the right diagnosis of the cause. Tremor caused by another medical condition may get better or go away when you treat that condition. If your tremor is caused by a certain medicine, stopping that medicine usually makes the tremor go away. Treatments for tremor can include: Medicines. There are different medicines for the specific types of tremor. Another option is Botox injections , which can treat several different types of tremor. Surgery may be used for severe cases that do not get better with medicines. The most common type is deep brain stimulation (DBS). DBS uses electrodes that are implanted in the brain. The electrodes send electrical pulses to the parts of the brain that are causing the tremor. Physical, speech-language, and occupational therapy , which may help to control tremor and deal with the daily challenges caused by the tremor. If you find that caffeine and other stimulants trigger your tremors, it may be helpful to cut them from your diet. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is urinary incontinence (UI)? Urinary incontinence (UI) is the loss of bladder control, or being unable to control urination. It is a common condition. It can range from being a minor problem to something that greatly affects your daily life.  In any case, it can get better with proper treatment. What are the types of urinary incontinence (UI)? There are several different types of UI. Each type has different symptoms and causes: Stress incontinence happens when stress or pressure on your bladder causes you to leak urine.  This could be due to coughing, sneezing, laughing, lifting something heavy, or physical activity. Causes include weak pelvic floor muscles and the bladder being out of its normal position. Urge, or urgency, incontinence happens when you have a strong urge (need) to urinate, and some urine leaks out before you can make it to the toilet. It is often related to an overactive bladder . Urge incontinence is most common in older people. It can sometimes be a sign of a urinary tract infection (UTI) . It can also happen in some neurological conditions , such as multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injuries . Overflow incontinence happens when your bladder doesn't empty all the way. This causes too much urine to stay in your bladder. Your bladder gets too full, and you leak urine. This form of UI is most common in men. Some of the causes include tumors, kidney stones , diabetes , and certain medicines. Functional incontinence happens when a physical or mental disability , trouble speaking , or some other problem keeps you from getting to the toilet in time. For example, someone with arthritis may have trouble unbuttoning his or her pants, or a person with Alzheimer's disease may not realize they need to plan to use the toilet. Mixed incontinence means that you have more than one type of incontinence. It's usually a combination of stress and urge incontinence. Transient incontinence is urine leakage that is caused by a temporary (transient) situation such as an infection or new medicine. Once the cause is removed, the incontinence goes away. Bedwetting refers to urine leakage during sleep. This is most common in children, but adults can also have it. Bedwetting is normal for many children. It is more common in boys. Bedwetting is often not considered a health problem, especially when it runs in the family. But if it still happens often at age 5 and older, it may be because of a bladder control problem. This problem could be caused by slow physical development, an illness, making too much urine at night, or another problem. Sometimes there is more than one cause. In adults, the causes include some medicines, caffeine , and alcohol . It can also be caused by certain health problems, such as diabetes insipidus , a urinary tract infection (UTI), kidney stones, enlarged prostate (BPH), and sleep apnea . Who is at risk for urinary incontinence (UI)? In adults, you are at higher risk of developing UI if you: Are female, especially after going through pregnancy, childbirth, and/or menopause Are older. As you age, your urinary tract muscles weaken, making it harder to hold in urine. Are a man with prostate problems Have certain health problems, such as diabetes, obesity , or long-lasting constipation Are a smoker Have a birth defect that affects the structure of your urinary tract In children, bedwetting is more common in younger children, boys, and those whose parents wet the bed when they were children. How is urinary incontinence (UI) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. Your provider may ask you to keep a bladder diary for a few days before your appointment. The bladder diary includes how much and when you drink liquids, when and how much you urinate, and whether you leak urine. A physical exam, which can include a rectal exam. Women may also get a pelvic exam. Urine and/or blood tests Bladder function tests Imaging tests What are the treatments for urinary incontinence (UI)? Treatment depends on the type and cause of your UI. You may need a combination of treatments. Your provider may first suggest self-care treatments, including: Lifestyle changes to reduce leaks: Drinking the right amount of liquid at the right time Being physically active Staying at a healthy weigh Avoiding constipation Not smoking Bladder training. This involves urinating according to a schedule. Your provider makes a schedule from you, based on information from your bladder diary. After you adjust to the schedule, you gradually wait a little longer between trips to the bathroom. This can help stretch your bladder so it can hold more urine. Doing exercises to strengthen your pelvic floor muscles . Strong pelvic floor muscles hold in urine better than weak muscles. The strengthening exercises are called Kegel exercises. They involve tightening and relaxing the muscles that control urine flow. If these treatments do not work, your provider may suggest other options such as: Medicines , which can be used to Relax the bladder muscles, to help prevent bladder spasms Block nerve signals that cause urinary frequency and urgency In men, shrink the prostate and improve urine flow Medical devices , including A catheter, which is a tube to carry urine out of the body. You might use one a few times a day or all the time. For women, a ring or a tampon-like device inserted into the vagina. The devices pushes up against your urethra to help decrease leaks. Bulking agents , which are injected into the bladder neck and urethra tissues to thicken them. This helps close your bladder opening so you have less leaking. Electrical nerve stimulation , which involves changing your bladder's reflexes using pulses of electricity Surgery to support the bladder in its normal position. This may be done with a sling that is attached to the pubic bone. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Every racial or ethnic group has specific health concerns.  Differences in the health of groups can result from: Genetics Environmental factors Access to care Cultural factors On this page, you'll find links to health issues that affect American Indians and Alaska Natives.

Every racial or ethnic group has specific health concerns. Differences in the health of groups can result 
from: Genetics Environmental factors Access to care Cultural factors On this page, you'll find links to health issues that affect Asian Americans.

Every racial or ethnic group has specific health concerns. Differences in the health of groups can result from: Genetics Environmental factors Access to care Cultural factors On this page, you'll find links to health issues that affect Black and African Americans.

Your child's health includes physical, mental and social well-being. Most parents know the basics of keeping children healthy, like offering them healthy foods , making sure they get enough sleep and exercise and insuring their safety . It is also important for children to get regular checkups with their health care provider. These visits are a chance to check your child's development . They are also a good time to catch or prevent problems. Other than checkups, school-age children should be seen for: Significant weight gain or loss Sleep problems or change in behavior Fever higher than 102 Rashes or skin infections Frequent sore throats Breathing problems

Health disparities are health differences between different groups of people. These health differences may include: How many people get certain diseases How severe the diseases are How many people have complications because of the diseases How many people die from a disease Whether people can get health care How many people get screened for a disease These groups of people may be based on: Race Ethnicity Immigrant status Disability Sex or gender Sexual orientation Geography Income Level of education NIH: National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities

Every racial or ethnic group has specific health concerns.  Differences in the health of groups can 
result from: Genetics Environmental factors Access to care Cultural factors On this page, you'll find links to health issues that affect Latino and Hispanic Americans.

Members of the LGBTQIA+ community include people who are: L esbian G ay B isexual T ransgender Q ueer or Q uestioning I ntersex A sexual Elsewhere on the gender and sexuality spectrum or allies to the community On this page you'll find information about health issues that are specific to the LGBTQIA+ community.

Most men need to pay more attention to their health. Compared to women, men are more likely to: Smoke and drink Make unhealthy or risky choices Put off regular checkups and medical care There are also health conditions that only affect men, such as prostate cancer and low testosterone. Many of the major health risks that men face - like colon cancer or heart disease - can be prevented and treated with early diagnosis. Screening tests can find diseases early, when they are easier to treat. It's important to get the screening tests you need.

Every racial or ethnic group has specific health concerns. Differences in the health of groups can result from: Genetics Environmental factors Access to care Cultural factors On this page, you'll find links to health issues that affect Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.

People in the U.S. are living longer than ever before. Many older adults live active and healthy lives. But there's no getting around one thing: as we age, our bodies and minds change. You need to know what to expect. Some changes may just be part of normal aging, while others may be a warning sign of a medical problem. It is important to know the difference, and to let your health care provider know if you have any concerns. Having a healthy lifestyle can help you to deal with normal aging changes and make the most of your life. This includes healthy eating , regular physical activity , and making mental health a priority.

As a teenager, you go through many changes. Your body is on its way to becoming its adult size. You may notice that you can't fit into your old shoes or that your jeans are now 3 inches too short. Along with these changes, you are probably becoming more independent and making more of your own choices. Some of the biggest choices you face are about your health. Healthy habits, including eating a healthy diet and being physically active, can help you feel good, look good, and do your best in school, work, or sports. They might also prevent diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, osteoporosis, stroke, and some cancers when you are older.

Service members and veterans may face some different health issues than civilians. Their families may also face some unique challenges, such as: Being separated from their loved ones. Worrying about a loved ones' safety in combat zones. Coping as a single parent while their partner is deployed. Having to move frequently. Helping their loved one deal with Illnesses and injuries from combat, including disabilities . This can lead to caregiver stress . Helping their loved one cope with the mental health effects of military service. These could include depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Dealing with these challenges can be difficult. Some possible sources of help include: Getting support from your family and community Using military outreach programs, which help families feel less isolated Professional counseling

Military service members and veterans have made sacrifices to our country, and they may face lots of different health issues. Some of the most common health problems they may have include chronic pain , sleep disorders , and mental health disorders . But they may also face some different health risks than civilians. Serving to protect our country is a special job, and along with it comes some special risks and job hazards. These include different types of injuries and health problems from exposures. What types of injuries do service members face? During their service, members are at risk for various injuries. These injuries can happen during training or while in combat. Sometimes the injuries are life-threatening or serious enough to cause disability . Others may not be as serious, but they may be painful and can affect daily life. Some of the specific types of injuries that service members may face include: Sprains and strains , especially in the ankles and knees . These injuries are often caused by exercise and running. Back and shoulder injuries, often from lifting and carrying. Tinnitus and hearing loss , typically from exposure to noise . Head injuries and traumatic brain injuries (TBIs). Shrapnel and gunshot wounds. Lost limbs . What other special health problems do service members face? There may also be a risk of health problems from exposure to environmental hazards, such as contaminated water, chemicals, infections, and burn pits. Sometimes the health problems caused by exposures don't develop until years later. Some service members experience military sexual trauma (MST). This includes sexual assault and sexual harassment. What mental health issues do service members and veterans face? Being in combat and being separated from your family can be stressful. So can readjusting to civilian life after the military. All of this stress can put service members and veterans at risk for mental health problems, including: Depression Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Anxiety Alcohol and drug use disorders There is also a risk of suicide . Veterans who are in crisis can get help from the Veteran's Crisis line by: Calling 988 and then pressing 1 Texting to 838255 Chatting with them online What health care services are available to service members and veterans? There are health care services especially for service members and veterans through: TRICARE, which is the Department of Defense's health care program. It has insurance plans and other services for uniformed service members, retirees, and their families around the world. The Veterans Health Administration, which is part of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). It provides medical and social support services to eligible veterans. The VA 's expanded health care and benefits for veterans exposed to burn pits, Agent Orange, and other toxic substances. To better understand and treat the health needs of veterans in the future, the VA created the Million Veteran Program (MVP). This research program is looking at how genes, lifestyle, military experiences, and exposures affect health and wellness in veterans.

Women have unique health issues. And some of the health issues that affect both men and women can affect women differently. Unique issues include pregnancy , menopause , and conditions of the female organs. Women can have a healthy pregnancy by getting early and regular prenatal care . They should also get recommended breast cancer, cervical cancer , and bone density screenings. Women and men also have many of the same health problems. But these problems can affect women differently. For example: Women are more likely to die following a heart attack than men Women are more likely to show signs of depression and anxiety than men The effects of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) can be more serious in women Osteoarthritis affects more women than men Women are more likely to have urinary tract problems NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is birth control? Birth control, also known as contraception, is the use of medicines, devices, or surgery to prevent pregnancy. There are many different types. Some are reversible, while others are permanent. Some types can also help prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs). What are the different types of birth control? There are several different types of birth control, and they work in different ways: Barrier methods Male condom A thin sheath that covers the penis to collect sperm and prevent it from entering the woman's body. Condoms that are made of latex and polyurethane can help prevent STIs. Female condom A thin, flexible plastic pouch. Part of the condom is inserted into the vagina before intercourse to prevent sperm from entering the uterus. The uterus, or womb, is the place where the baby grows during pregnancy. Female condoms can also help prevent STIs. Contraceptive sponge A small sponge that you put into the vagina to cover the cervix (the opening of the uterus). The sponge also contains a spermicide to kill sperm. Spermicide A substance that can kill sperm cells. It comes in a foam, jelly, cream, suppository, or film. You put it into the vagina near the uterus. Spermicide can be used alone or with a diaphragm or cervical cap. Diaphragm and cervical cap Cups that are placed inside the vagina to cover the cervix. They may be used with spermicide. They come in different sizes, so it's important to see your health care provider to figure out which size works best for you. Hormonal methods Oral contraceptives ("the pill") Pills that a woman takes every day. They may contain only progestin or both progestin and estrogen. Contraceptive patch A patch that a woman puts on her skin each week. The patch releases hormones into the bloodstream. Vaginal ring A thin, flexible ring. The woman inserts the ring into the vagina, where it continually releases hormones for three weeks. She takes it out for the fourth week. After that week, she puts in a new ring. Injectable birth control An injection of a hormone that a woman gets once every three months. This is done in your provider's office. Implant A single, thin rod that a provider inserts under the skin of a women's upper arm.  It is done in your provider's office. The implant can last for four years. Long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) Intrauterine device (IUD) A small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the uterus. This is done in the provider's office. IUDs can last from 3 to 10 years. There are two types: hormonal IUDs and copper IUDs. Sterilization Tubal ligation A surgery that prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is permanent. Vasectomy A surgery that prevents a man from getting someone pregnant. It is permanent. What are some other forms of pregnancy prevention? There are some types of pregnancy prevention that do not involve medicines, devices, or surgery: Other forms of pregnancy prevention Fertility awareness-based methods They are also called natural rhythm methods. They involve tracking the woman's fertility cycle and avoiding sex or using barrier methods on the days when she is most likely to get pregnant. This method may have higher pregnancy rates than other types. Lactational amenorrhea method (LAM) A form of natural birth control for breastfeeding mothers. It relies on the new mother feeding her baby only breastmilk for up to six months and having no periods or spotting during that time. Withdrawal During intercourse, the penis is pulled out of the vagina before ejaculation. The goal is to keep sperm from entering the vagina . But the sperm can leak out before the penis is pulled out, so this method has higher pregnancy rates than other types. What is emergency contraception? Emergency contraception is not a regular method of birth control. But it can be used to prevent pregnancy after unprotected intercourse or if a condom breaks. There are two types: Copper IUD, which is a small, T-shaped device that a provider inserts into the within 120 hours of unprotected intercourse. Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs), which are hormonal pills which the woman takes as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse. What else should I know about birth control? When deciding which birth control type is right for you, there are many different factors to consider: Do you want to have children someday? How soon? Do you have any health conditions? How often do you have sex? How many sex partners do you have? Do you also need protection from HIV and other STIs? How well does the birth control method work? Are there any side effects? Will you be able to use it correctly every time? How much does it cost? Your provider can answer your questions about birth control to help you select the best type for you. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is breast cancer? Breast cancer is a cancer that starts in breast tissue.  It happens when cells in the breast change and grow out of control. The cells usually form a tumor. Sometimes the cancer does not spread any further. This is called "in situ." If the cancer spreads outside the breast, the cancer is called "invasive." It may just spread to nearby tissues and lymph nodes. Or the cancer may metastasize (spread to other parts of the body) through the lymph system or the blood. Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in women in the United States. Rarely, it can also affect men . What are the types of breast cancer? There are different types of breast cancer. The types are based on which breast cells turn into cancer. The types include: Ductal carcinoma , which begins in the cells of the ducts. This is the most common type. Lobular carcinoma , which begins in the lobules. It is more often found in both breasts than other types of breast cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer , in which cancer cells block lymph vessels in the skin of the breast. The breast becomes warm, red, and swollen. This is a rare type. Paget's disease of the breast , which is a cancer involving the skin of the nipple. It usually also affects the darker skin around the nipple. It is also rare. What causes breast cancer? Breast cancer happens when there are changes in the genetic material (DNA). Often, the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. But sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Breast cancer that is caused by inherited genetic changes is called hereditary breast cancer. There are also certain genetic changes that can raise your risk of breast cancer, including changes in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. These two changes also raise your risk of ovarian and other cancers. Besides genetics, your lifestyle and the environment can affect your risk of breast cancer. Who is at risk for breast cancer? The factors that raise your risk of breast cancer include: Older age History of breast cancer or benign (noncancer) breast disease Inherited risk of breast cancer, including having BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene changes Dense breast tissue A reproductive history that leads to more exposure to the estrogen hormone, including Menstruating at an early age Being at an older age when you first gave birth or never having given birth Starting menopause at a later age Taking hormone therapy for symptoms of menopause Radiation therapy to the breast or chest Obesity Drinking alcohol What are the signs and symptoms of breast cancer? The signs and symptoms of breast cancer include: A new lump or thickening in or near the breast or in the armpit. A change in the size or shape of the breast. A dimple or puckering in the skin of the breast. It may look like the skin of an orange. A nipple turned inward into the breast. Nipple discharge other than breast milk. The discharge might happen suddenly, be bloody, or happen in only one breast. Scaly, red, or swollen skin in the nipple area or the breast Pain in any area of the breast. How is breast cancer diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose breast cancer and figure out which type you have: A physical exam, including a clinical breast exam (CBE). This involves checking for any lumps or anything else that seems unusual with the breasts and armpits. A medical history. Imaging tests, such as a mammogram , an ultrasound , or an MRI . Breast biopsy . Blood chemistry tests, which measure different substances in the blood, including electrolytes, fats, proteins, glucose (sugar), and enzymes. Some of the specific blood chemistry tests include a basic metabolic panel (BMP) , a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) , and an electrolyte panel . If these tests show that you have breast cancer, you will have tests that study the cancer cells. These tests help your provider decide which treatment would be best for you. The tests may include: Genetic tests for genetic changes such as in the BRCA and TP53 genes. HER2 test . HER2 is a protein involved with cell growth. It is on the outside of all breast cells. If your breast cancer cells have more HER2 than normal, they can grow more quickly and spread to other parts of the body. An estrogen and progesterone receptor test. This test measures the amount of estrogen and progesterone ( hormones ) receptors in cancer tissue. If there are more receptors than normal, the cancer is called estrogen and/or progesterone receptor positive. This type of breast cancer may grow more quickly. Another step is staging the cancer. Staging involves doing tests to find out whether the cancer has spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. The tests may include other diagnostic imaging tests and a sentinel lymph node biopsy. This biopsy is done to see whether the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. What are the treatments for breast cancer? Treatments for breast cancer include: Surgery such as A mastectomy , which removes the whole breast A lumpectomy to remove the cancer and some normal tissue around it, but not the breast itself Radiation therapy Chemotherapy Hormone therapy, which blocks cancer cells from getting the hormones they need to grow Targeted therapy, which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Immunotherapy Can breast cancer be prevented? You may be able to help prevent breast cancer by making healthy lifestyle changes such as: Staying at a healthy weight Limiting alcohol use Getting enough exercise e Limiting your exposure to estrogen by Breastfeeding your babies if you can Limiting hormone therapy If you are at high risk, your health care provider may suggest that you take certain medicines to lower the risk. Some women at very high risk may decide to get a mastectomy (of their healthy breasts) to prevent breast cancer. It's also important to get regular mammograms. They may be able to identify breast cancer in the early stages, when it is easier to treat. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Most women experience breast changes at some time. Your age, hormone levels, and medicines you take may cause lumps, bumps, and discharges (fluids that are not breast milk). If you have a breast lump, pain, discharge or skin irritation, see your health care provider. Minor and serious breast problems have similar  symptoms. Although many women fear cancer , most breast problems are not cancer. Some common breast changes are: Fibrocystic breast changes - lumpiness, thickening and swelling, often just before a woman's period Cysts - fluid-filled lumps Fibroadenomas - solid, round, rubbery lumps that move easily when pushed, occurring most in younger women Intraductal papillomas - growths similar to warts near the nipple Blocked milk ducts Milk production when a woman is not breastfeeding NIH: National Cancer Institute

Breastfeeding offers many benefits to your baby. Breast milk contains the right balance of nutrients to help your infant grow into a strong and healthy toddler. Some of the nutrients in breast milk also help protect your infant against some common childhood illnesses and infections. It may also help your health. Certain types of cancer may occur less often in mothers who have breastfed their babies. Women who don't have health problems should try to give their babies breast milk for at least the first six months of life. Most women with health problems can breastfeed. There are rare exceptions when women are advised not to breastfeed because they have certain illnesses.  Some medicines, illegal drugs, and alcohol can also pass through the breast milk and cause harm to your baby. Check with your health care provider if you have concerns about whether you should breastfeed. If you are having problems with breastfeeding, contact a lactation consultant. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

If you need a mastectomy , you have a choice about whether or not to have surgery to rebuild the shape of the breast. Instead of breast reconstruction, you could choose to wear a breast form that replaces the breast, wear padding inside your bra, or do nothing. All of these options have pros and cons. What is right for one woman may not be right for another. Breast reconstruction may be done at the same time as the mastectomy, or it may be done later on. If radiation therapy is part of the treatment plan, your doctor may suggest waiting until after radiation therapy. If you're thinking about breast reconstruction, talk to a plastic surgeon before the mastectomy, even if you plan to have your reconstruction later on. A surgeon can reconstruct the breast in many ways. Some women choose to have breast implants, which are filled with saline or silicone gel. Another method uses tissue taken from another part of your body. The plastic surgeon can take skin, muscle, and fat from your lower abdomen, back, or buttocks. The type of reconstruction that is best for you depends on your age, body type, and the type of cancer surgery that you had. A plastic surgeon can help you decide. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, the place where a baby grows during pregnancy. Cervical cancer is caused by a virus called HPV . The virus spreads through sexual contact. Most women's bodies are able to fight HPV infection. But sometimes the virus leads to cancer. You're at higher risk if you smoke, have had many children, use birth control pills for a long time, or have HIV infection. Cervical cancer may not cause any symptoms at first. Later, you may have pelvic pain or bleeding from the vagina. It usually takes several years for normal cells in the cervix to turn into cancer cells. Your health care provider can find abnormal cells by doing a Pap test to examine cells from the cervix. You may also have an HPV test.  If your results are abnormal, you may need a biopsy or other tests. By getting regular screenings , you can find and treat any problems before they turn into cancer. Treatment may include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination. The choice of treatment depends on the size of the tumor, whether the cancer has spread and whether you would like to become pregnant someday. Vaccines can protect against several types of HPV, including some that can cause cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, the place where a baby grows during pregnancy.  Cancer screening is looking for cancer before you have any symptoms. Cancer found early may be easier to treat. Cervical cancer screening is usually part of a woman's health checkup .  There are two types of tests: the Pap test and the HPV test.   For both, the doctor or nurse collects cells from the surface of the cervix.  With the Pap test, the lab checks the sample for cancer cells or abnormal cells that could become cancer later.  With the HPV test, the lab checks for HPV infection.  HPV is a virus that spreads through sexual contact.  It can sometimes lead to cancer.  If your screening tests are abnormal, your doctor may do more tests, such as a biopsy . Cervical cancer screening has risks.  The results can sometimes be wrong, and you may have unnecessary follow-up tests.  There are also benefits.  Screening has been shown to decrease the number of deaths from cervical cancer. You and your doctor should discuss your risk for cervical cancer, the pros and cons of the screening tests, at what age to start being screened, and how often to be screened.

What is a cesarean delivery? A cesarean delivery, also called a cesarean section or c-section, is surgery to deliver a baby. The baby is taken out through your abdomen (belly). In the United States, almost one in three babies are born this way. Some cesarean deliveries are planned. Others are emergency cesarean deliveries, which are done when unexpected problems happen during delivery. When is a cesarean delivery needed? You may need a cesarean delivery because: You have health problems , including infection You are carrying more than one baby Your baby is too big Your baby is in the wrong position Your baby's health is in danger Labor is not moving along as it should There are problems with your placenta (the organ that brings oxygen and nutrients to your baby) Not everyone who has had a cesarean delivery before will need another one next time. You may be able to have a vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC). Talk to your health care provider about what is right for you. How is a cesarean delivery done? Before the surgery, you will be given pain medicine. Depending on your circumstances, you might get: An epidural block, which numbs the lower part of the body through an injection in the spine. A spinal block, which numbs the lower part of the body through an injection directly into the spinal fluid. General anesthesia, which makes you unconscious during the surgery. This is often used during emergency cesarean deliveries. During the surgery, the surgeon will: Make a cut in your abdomen and uterus. The cut is usually horizontal, but in some cases it may be vertical. Open the amniotic sac and take out your baby. Cut the umbilical cord and the placenta. Close the uterus and abdomen with stitches that will later dissolve. What are the risks of a cesarean delivery? A cesarean delivery is relatively safe for you and your baby. But it is still a major surgery, and it carries risks. They may include: Infection Blood loss Blood clots in the legs, pelvic organs, or lungs Injury to surrounding structures, such as the bowel or bladder A reaction to the medicines or anesthesia used Some of these risks do also apply to a vaginal birth. But it does take longer to recover from a cesarean delivery than from a vaginal birth. And having a cesarean delivery can raise the risk of having difficulties with future pregnancies. The more cesarean deliveries you have, the more the risk goes up. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

When you are ready to have your baby, you'll go through labor.  Labor is the process of giving birth. Signs that you might be going into labor include: Contractions that are regular then start to come closer together Leaking fluid or bleeding from the vagina Low, dull backache Abdominal cramps Call your health care provider if you have any of these signs, even if it is before your due date. Preterm labor can start before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. Labor happens in three stages. The first stage begins with contractions. It continues until your cervix has become thinner and dilated (stretched) to about 4 inches wide. The second stage is the active stage, in which you begin to push downward. Crowning is when your baby's scalp comes into view. Shortly afterward, your baby is born. In the third stage, you deliver the placenta. The placenta is the organ that supplied food and oxygen to your baby during pregnancy. Mothers and babies are monitored closely during labor. Most women are able to have a baby through normal vaginal delivery. If there are complications , the baby may need to be delivered surgically by a Cesarean section . NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Childbirth is the process of giving birth to a baby. It includes labor and delivery. Usually everything goes well, but problems can happen. They may cause a risk to the mother, baby, or both. Some of the more common childbirth problems include: Preterm (premature) labor , when your labor starts before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy Premature rupture of membranes (PROM), when your water breaks too early. If labor does not start soon afterwards, this can raise the risk of infection. Problems with the placenta , such as the placenta covering the cervix, separating from the uterus before birth, or being attached too firmly to the uterus Labor that does not progress , meaning that labor is stalled. This can happen when Your contractions weaken Your cervix does not dilate (open) enough or is taking too long to dilate The baby is not in the right position The baby is too big or your pelvis is too small for the baby to move through the birth canal Abnormal heart rate of the baby. Often, an abnormal heart rate is not a problem. But if the heart rate gets very fast or very slow, it can be a sign that your baby is not getting enough oxygen or that there are other problems. Problems with the umbilical cord , such as the cord getting caught on the baby's arm, leg, or neck. It's also a problem if cord comes out before the baby does. Problems with the position of the baby , such as breech, in which the baby is going to come out feet first Shoulder dystocia , when the baby's head comes out, but the shoulder gets stuck Perinatal asphyxia , which happens when the baby does not get enough oxygen in the uterus, during labor or delivery, or just after birth Perineal tears , tearing of your vagina and the surrounding tissues Excessive bleeding , which can happen when the delivery causes tears to the uterus or if you are not able to deliver the placenta after you give birth to the baby Post-term pregnancy , when your pregnancy lasts more than 42 weeks If you have problems in childbirth, your health care provider may need to give you medicines to induce or speed up labor, use tools to help guide the baby out of the birth canal, or deliver the baby by Cesarean section . NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant. If you have an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg grows in the wrong place, outside the uterus, usually in the fallopian tubes. The result is usually a miscarriage . Ectopic pregnancy can be a medical emergency if it ruptures. Signs of ectopic pregnancy include: Abdominal pain Shoulder pain Vaginal bleeding Feeling dizzy or faint Get medical care right away if you have these signs. Doctors use drugs or surgery to remove the ectopic tissue so it doesn't damage your organs. Many women who have had ectopic pregnancies go on to have healthy pregnancies later. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is endometriosis? The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a person is pregnant. The uterus is lined with tissue (endometrium). Endometriosis is a disease in which tissue that is similar to the lining of the uterus grows in other places in your body. These patches of tissue are called "implants," "nodules," or "lesions." They are most often found: On or under the ovaries On the fallopian tubes, which carry egg cells from the ovaries to the uterus Behind the uterus On the tissues that hold the uterus in place On the bowels or bladder In rare cases, the tissue may grow on your lungs or in other parts of your body. What causes endometriosis? The cause of endometriosis is unknown. Who is at risk for endometriosis? Endometriosis can affect anyone who menstruates. Certain factors can raise or lower your risk of getting it. You are at higher risk if: You have a mother, sister, or daughter with endometriosis Your period started before age 11 Your monthly cycles are short (less than 27 days) Your menstrual cycles are heavy and last more than 7 days You have a lower risk if: You have been pregnant before Your periods started late in adolescence You breastfeed your babies What are the symptoms of endometriosis? The main symptoms of endometriosis are: Pelvic pain , which often happens during your period. Infertility Other possible symptoms include: Painful menstrual cramps , which may get worse over time Pain during or after sex Pain in the intestine or lower abdomen Pain with bowel movements or urination, usually during your period Heavy periods Spotting or bleeding between periods Digestive or gastrointestinal symptoms Fatigue or lack of energy How is endometriosis diagnosed? Surgery is the only way to know for sure that you have endometriosis. First, however, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You will have a pelvic exam and may have some imaging tests . The most common surgery to diagnose endometriosis is a laparoscopy . This is a type of surgery that uses a laparoscope, a thin tube with a camera and light. The surgeon inserts the laparoscope through a small cut in the skin near your belly button. Your provider can make a diagnosis based on how the patches of endometriosis look. They may also do a biopsy to get a tissue sample. What are the treatments for endometriosis? There is no cure for endometriosis, but there are treatments for the symptoms. Your provider will work with you to decide which treatments would be best for you. Treatments for endometriosis pain include: Pain relievers , including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen and a prescription medicine specifically for endometriosis. Providers may sometimes prescribe opioids for severe pain. Hormone therapy , which stops the ovaries from making hormones. This may slow the growth of the endometrial tissue and may prevent new areas from growing. Types of hormone therapy include: Birth control pills . Progestin therapy. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) medicines (GnRH agonists and antagonists). These medicines cause a temporary menopause. After your stop taking the medicines, your menstrual periods will start again, and pregnancy is possible. Surgical treatments for severe pain, including procedures to remove the endometriosis patches or cut some nerves in the pelvis. The surgery may be a laparoscopy or major surgery. Treatments for infertility caused by endometriosis include: Laparoscopy to remove the endometriosis patches In vitro fertilization NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Infertility means not being able to get pregnant after at least one year of trying (or 6 months if the woman is over age 35). If a woman keeps having miscarriages , it is also called infertility.  Female infertility can result from age, physical problems, hormone problems, and lifestyle or environmental factors. Most cases of infertility in women result from problems with producing eggs. In primary ovarian insufficiency , the ovaries stop functioning before natural menopause.  In polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), the ovaries may not release an egg regularly or they may not release a healthy egg. About a third of the time, infertility is because of a problem with the woman. One third of the time, it is a problem with the man . Sometimes no cause can be found. If you think you might be infertile, see your doctor. There are tests that may tell if you have fertility problems. When it is possible to find the cause, treatments may include medicines, surgery, or assisted reproductive technologies . Happily, many couples treated for infertility are able to have babies. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is heart disease? Heart disease is a general term that includes many types of heart problems. It's also called cardiovascular disease, which means heart and blood vessel disease. Coronary artery disease (also called coronary heart disease) is the most common type of heart disease in both men and women. It happens slowly over time when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. The plaque narrows or blocks blood flow to the heart muscle and can lead to: Angina - chest pain from lack of blood flow Heart attacks - when part of the heart muscle dies from loss of blood flow Heart failure - when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs Arrhythmia - a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat How does heart disease affect women? In the United States, heart disease is the number one cause of death in women. But women are often not diagnosed with heart disease as quickly as men are. That's because: Women are more likely than men to have "silent" heart disease, meaning that they don't have symptoms. Health care providers may not recognize heart disease in women because women's symptoms may be different from men's symptoms. Women are more likely than men to have certain types of heart disease that can be harder to diagnose. A delay in diagnosis may mean a delay in medical care that could help prevent serious problems, such as a heart attack. That's why it's important to learn about your risk for heart disease, the symptoms in women, and how to keep your heart healthy. What types of heart disease do women get? Women can get any type of heart disease. Like men, the most common type of heart disease among women is coronary artery disease. But there are certain types of heart disease which are less common, but affect women more often than men: Coronary microvascular disease - Chest pain from spasms (sudden tightening) in the smallest arteries of the heart that pinch off blood flow. It typically happens during rest or routine activities. This serious condition increases your risk of having a heart attack or other heart diseases.  This type may be harder to diagnose since blockages in smaller arteries can be harder to see on imaging tests. Broken heart syndrome - Strong chest pain or other signs that look like a heart attack. It's caused by the stress of powerful emotions, such as deep grief, anger, or surprise. It can happen even if you're healthy. It mostly affects women after menopause and usually doesn't cause any lasting damage. Variant angina - A rare type of strong chest pain from spasms in the heart arteries. The pain usually happens in a pattern during sleep. Variant angina rarely causes a heart attack. Which women are more likely to develop heart disease? Your risk for developing heart disease increases with: Menopause . Women can develop heart disease at any age, but your risk increases after your periods stop, usually by age 55. Before menopause, your body makes more estrogen (a female hormone ) which helps protect against heart disease. That's why women generally develop coronary artery disease 10 years later than men. During and after menopause, estrogen levels drop and your risk for heart diseases goes up. If your periods stop before age 40, your risk will be higher than other women your age. Family history of heart disease. Your risk for heart disease may be higher if your: Mother or sister had heart disease before age 65. Father or brother had heart disease before age 55. Problems during pregnancy , such as high blood pressure , gestational diabetes , anemia , and high blood pressure . Use of hormonal birth control (pills, patches, or vaginal rings with estrogen and progesterone). Endometriosis . Polycystic ovary syndrome . Inflammatory and autoimmune diseases . Metabolic syndrome . Mental health issues , such as stress, anxiety , or depression . Health risks from a lack physical activity . Obesity or being overweight. Diabetes . Low HDL cholesterol levels . Mild to moderate high blood pressure . Smoking . If you have one or more risks for heart disease, ask your health care provider for help understanding your risk level. Ask if you need any heart tests to help catch heart disease early. What are the symptoms of heart disease and heart attack in women? When women have symptoms of heart disease , they may include: Pain or discomfort in the chest that may be dull and heavy or sharp Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper belly, or back Nausea or vomiting Unusual fatigue Shortness of breath (feeling like you can't get enough air) during physical activity Women who have coronary artery disease are more likely than men to have chest pain when resting or doing daily activities, rather than during exercise. They're also more likely than men to feel chest pain from mental stress. Symptoms of a heart attack in women may also be different than in men. Chest pain is the most common symptom for both sexes. It may feel like crushing or squeezing. But women are somewhat less likely than men to have chest pain. During a heart attack , women may feel: Pressure or tightness in the chest Pain in the upper back, arms, neck, jaw or throat Dizziness Unusual fatigue Indigestion , heartburn , nausea, or vomiting Stomach pain Shortness of breath Heart attacks usually don't look like the sudden, dramatic events we see in the movies. The symptoms may be mild or strong. They may start slowly. They can stop and then come back. Can heart disease in women be prevented? You can help lower your risk by: Learning how to prevent heart disease and making heart-healthy habits part of your daily life. Asking your provider about your personal risk for heart disease and the best way to manage your heart health. Remember, women can have heart disease without symptoms. But if you pay attention to your risk for heart disease, you can take action to prevent problems or keep them from getting worse. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

If you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant, it's important to get tested for HIV as soon as possible. If you find out that do have HIV , you can start treatment right away to protect your health and the health of your baby. If I have HIV, can I pass it on to my baby during pregnancy? If you are pregnant and have HIV, there is a risk of passing HIV to your baby. It can happen in three ways: During pregnancy During childbirth, especially if it is vaginal childbirth During breastfeeding But having HIV doesn't mean that you can't have children. Treatment with a combination of HIV medicines can help prevent passing HIV to your baby and protect your own health. If I have HIV, how can I prevent giving it to my baby? There are several different steps you can take to help prevent passing HIV to your baby: Taking HIV medicines . HIV medicines reduce the amount of HIV in the body (viral load) to a very low level. The goal is to get your viral load so low that a standard lab test can't detect it. This is called having an "undetectable viral load." Having an undetectable viral load is the best thing you can do to stay healthy and prevent your baby from getting HIV. These medicines will also help protect your health. Most HIV medicines are safe to use during pregnancy. They don't usually raise the risk of birth defects . But it is important to talk with your health care provider about the risks and benefits of the different medicines. Together you can decide which medicines are right for you. Then you need to make sure you take your medicines regularly. If needed, having a cesarean delivery . If your viral load is not reduced enough by the medicines, having a cesarean delivery (C-Section) can help prevent passing HIV to your baby. Giving HIV medicines to the baby. Your baby will get HIV medicines as soon as possible after birth. The medicines protect your baby from infection from any HIV that passed from you during childbirth. Which medicine your baby gets depends on several factors, including what your viral load was just before you gave birth. Your baby will need to take medicines for 4 to 6 weeks. He or she will get several HIV tests over the first few months. Not breastfeeding. Breast milk can have HIV in it. In the United States, infant formula is safe and readily available. So the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend that if you have HIV, you should feed your baby formula instead of breastfeeding. What if I want to get pregnant and my partner has HIV? If you are trying to get pregnant, it's important for your partner to also get tested for HIV. If your partner does have HIV and you do not, talk to your provider about taking PrEP . PrEP stands for pre-exposure prophylaxis. This means taking medicines to prevent HIV. The PrEP helps to protect both you and your baby from HIV.

What is HIV? HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. It harms your immune system by destroying a type of white blood cell that helps your body fight infection. This puts you at risk for other infections and diseases. How does HIV spread? HIV can spread in different ways: By having unprotected vaginal or anal sex with a person who has HIV. "Unprotected" means not using condoms or medicine to treat or prevent HIV. This is the most common way it spreads. Anal sex is the riskiest type of sex for getting or spreading HIV. The rectum's lining is thin and may allow HIV to enter the body during anal sex. During vaginal sex, HIV can enter the body through the delicate tissue that lines the vagina and cervix. Rarely, through oral sex with a person who has HIV. By sharing drug needles. Through contact with the blood of a person who has HIV. From mother to baby during pregnancy , childbirth, or breastfeeding. How does HIV affect women differently from men? About one in four people in the United States who have HIV are women. Women who have HIV have some different problems from men: Complications such as Repeated vaginal yeast infections Severe pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) A higher risk of cervical cancer Menstrual cycle problems A higher risk of osteoporosis A higher risk of heart disease , especially heart attacks Entering menopause younger or having more severe hot flashes Different, sometimes more severe, side effects from the medicines that treat HIV Drug interactions between some HIV medicines and hormonal birth control The risk of giving HIV to their baby while pregnancy or during childbirth Are there treatments for HIVS? There is no cure, but there are many medicines to treat both HIV infection and the infections and cancers that come with it. People who get early treatment can live longer and healthier lives .

Menopause is the time in a woman's life when her period stops. It is a normal part of aging.  In the years before and during menopause, the levels of female hormones can go up and down. This can cause symptoms such as hot flashes, night sweats, pain during sex, and vaginal dryness. For some women, the symptoms are mild, and they go away on their own. Other women take hormone replacement therapy (HRT), also called menopausal hormone therapy, to relieve these symptoms. HRT may also protect against osteoporosis . HRT is not for everyone. You should not use HRT if you: Think that you are pregnant Have problems with vaginal bleeding Have had certain kinds of cancers Have had a stroke or heart attack Have had blood clots Have liver disease There are different types of HRT. Some have only one hormone, while others have two. Most are pills that you take every day, but there are also skin patches, vaginal creams, gels, and rings. Taking HRT has some risks. For some women, hormone therapy may increase their chances of getting blood clots , heart attacks , strokes , breast cancer , and gallbladder disease . Certain types of HRT have a higher risk, and each woman's own risks can vary, depending upon her medical history and lifestyle. You and your health care provider need to discuss the risks and benefits for you. If you do decide to take HRT, it should be the lowest dose that helps and for the shortest time needed. You should check if you still need to take HRT every 3-6 months. Food and Drug Administration

A hysterectomy is surgery to remove a woman's uterus or womb. The uterus is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant.  After a hysterectomy, you no longer have menstrual periods and can't become pregnant.  Sometimes the surgery also removes the ovaries and fallopian tubes. If you have both ovaries taken out, you will enter menopause . Your health care provider might recommend a hysterectomy if you have: Fibroids Endometriosis that hasn't been cured by medicine or surgery Uterine prolapse -  when the uterus drops into the vagina Cancer of the uterine , cervix , or ovaries Vaginal bleeding that persists despite treatment Chronic pelvic pain , as a last resort Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Infertility means not being able to become pregnant after a year of trying. If a woman can get pregnant but keeps having miscarriages or stillbirths , that's also called infertility. Infertility is fairly common. After one year of having unprotected sex, about 15% of couples are unable to get pregnant. About a third of the time, infertility can be traced to the woman . In another third of cases, it is because of the man . The rest of the time, it is because of both partners or no cause can be found. There are treatments that are specifically for men or for women. Some involve both partners. Drugs, assisted reproductive technology , and surgery are common treatments. Happily, many couples treated for infertility go on to have babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is intimate partner violence (IPV)? Intimate partner violence (IPV) is abuse that happens in a romantic relationship. The intimate partner could be a current or former spouse or dating partner. IPV is also known as domestic violence. IPV may include different types of abuse, such as: Physical violence , when a person hurts or tries to hurt a partner by hitting, kicking, or using another type of physical force. Sexual violence which involves forcing or attempting to force a partner to take part in sexual activity when the partner does not or cannot consent. The sexual activity could include things like sex acts, sexual touching, or non-physical sexual events (e.g., sexting). Emotional abuse , which includes threats, name-calling, put-downs, and humiliation. It can also involve controlling behavior, such as telling a partner how to act or dress and not letting them see family or friends. Economic abuse , also called financial abuse, which involves controlling access to money. Stalking , which is repeated, unwanted contact that causes fear or concern for the safety of the partner. This can include watching or following the partner. The stalker may send repeated, unwanted phone calls or texts. Who is affected by intimate partner violence (IPV)? It is hard to know exactly how common IPV is because it is often not reported. But we do know that anyone can be affected by it. IPV can happen to anyone. It affects people with all levels of income and education. What are the signs that someone is experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? If you think that a loved one might be experiencing IPV, watch for these signs: Does your friend or loved one: Have unexplained cuts or bruises? Avoid friends, family, and favorite activities? Make excuses for their partner's behavior? Look uncomfortable or fearful around their partner? Does your friend or loved one's partner: Yell at or make fun of them? Try to control them by making all the decisions? Check up on them at work or school? Force them to do sexual things they don't want to do? Threaten to hurt themself if the partner wants to break up? What can I do if I am experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? Your safety is the most important concern. If you are in immediate danger, call 911. If you are not in immediate danger, you can: Get medical care if you have been injured or sexually assaulted. Call a helpline for free, anonymous help. You can contact the National Domestic Violence Hotline at 800-799-SAFE (7233) or 800-787-3224 (TTY). You can also chat with them through their website or through text by texting START to 88788. Find out where to get help in your community. Contact local organizations that can help you. Make a safety plan to leave. Intimate partner violence usually does not get better. Think about a safe place for you to go and all of the things that you will need when you leave. Save the evidence. Keep evidence of abuse, such as pictures of your injuries or threatening emails or texts. Make sure that it is in a safe place the abuser cannot access. Talk to someone you trust , such as a family member, a friend, a co-worker, or a spiritual leader. Consider getting a restraining order to protect yourself. How can I help someone who is experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? Let your loved one know that being treated this way isn't healthy and that they are not to blame. You should: Call 911 if there is immediate danger. Watch for the signs of abuse. Learn about the signs and keep track of the ones that you see. Find out about local resources. Get the addresses and phone numbers of some local resources in your community. Then you'll be able to share the information if the person is ready for it. Set up a time to talk. Make sure you can have your conversation in a safe, private place. Your loved one's partner may have access to his or her cell phone or computer, so be careful about sharing information over text or email. Be specific about why you are worried. Describe the behaviors that concern you. Be as specific as possible when explaining why you are worried. Plan for safety. If your loved one is ready to leave an abusive partner, help make a plan for getting out of the relationship as safely as possible. An intimate partner violence counselor can help with making a safety plan. Be patient and do not judge. You should talk about your concerns with your loved one, but you need to understand that they may not be ready to talk about it. Let them know that you're available to talk at any time, and that you will listen without judging them.

Members of the LGBTQIA+ community include people who are: L esbian G ay B isexual T ransgender Q ueer or Q uestioning I ntersex A sexual Elsewhere on the gender and sexuality spectrum or allies to the community On this page you'll find information about health issues that are specific to the LGBTQIA+ community.

What is a mammogram? A mammogram is an x-ray picture of the breast. Health care providers use mammograms to look for early signs of breast cancer . There are two types of mammograms: screening mammograms and diagnostic mammograms. What is a screening mammogram? A screening mammogram is a mammogram usually done for women who have no signs or symptoms of breast cancer. Regular screening mammograms can help reduce the number of deaths from breast cancer among women ages 40 to 74. This is because they can find breast cancer early and treatment can start earlier, maybe before it has spread. But screening mammograms can also have risks. They can sometimes find something that looks abnormal but isn't cancer. This leads to further testing and can cause you anxiety. Sometimes mammograms can miss cancer when it is there. It also exposes you to radiation . You should talk to your provider about the benefits and drawbacks of mammograms. Together, you can decide when to start and how often to have a mammogram. Not much is known about breast cancer risk in transgender people. If you are transgender, talk to your provider about your risk and whether you need screening mammograms. What is a diagnostic mammogram? A diagnostic mammogram is done for people who have a lump or other signs or symptoms of breast cancer. The signs can include breast pain, thickening of the skin of the breast, nipple discharge, or a change in breast size or shape. But these signs can also be caused by a breast condition that is benign (not cancer). A mammogram, along with other tests, can help your provider figure out whether you have cancer. How is a mammogram done? When you have a mammogram, you stand in front of an x-ray machine. The person who takes the x-rays places your breast between two plastic plates. The plates press your breast and make it flat. This may be uncomfortable, but it helps get a clear picture. You will get both breasts x-rayed from the front and from the side. Afterwards, a radiologist (a doctor with special training) will read the mammogram. The doctor will look at the x-ray for early signs of breast cancer or other problems. You will usually get the results within a few weeks, although it depends on the clinic or medical office that you went to. If your results are not normal, you should hear back earlier. Contact your provider or the office where you had the mammogram if you do not receive a report of your results within 30 days. What happens if my mammogram is not normal? An abnormal (not normal) mammogram does not always mean that there is cancer. You will need to have additional mammograms, tests, or exams before your provider can tell for sure. You may also be referred to a breast specialist or a surgeon. But it does not necessarily mean you have cancer or need surgery. You would see one of these doctors because they are experts in diagnosing breast problems.

A mastectomy is surgery to remove a breast or part of a breast. It is usually done to treat breast cancer .  Types of breast surgery include: Total (simple) mastectomy - removal of breast tissue and nipple Modified radical mastectomy - removal of the breast, most of the lymph nodes under the arm, and often the lining over the chest muscles Lumpectomy - surgery to remove the tumor and a small amount of normal tissue around it Which surgery you have depends on the stage of cancer, size of the tumor, size of the breast, and whether the lymph nodes are involved. Many women have breast reconstruction to rebuild the breast after a mastectomy. Sometimes mastectomy is done to prevent breast cancer. Only high-risk patients have this type of surgery. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is menopause? Menopause is the time in your life when you stop having your period and can no longer get pregnant. You have reached menopause when you have not had a period for 12 months. The time leading up to menopause is called the menopausal transition, or perimenopause. This transition usually begins in when you are in your 40s, but sometimes it can start earlier. It can last for several years. The most common age for reaching menopause is between 45 and 55 years old. What is early menopause? Early, or premature menopause happens when your ovaries stop making hormones and periods stop before age 40. This can happen on its own (with no known cause). It can also happen because of surgery to remove the ovaries or uterus . Medical treatments such as chemotherapy or hormone therapy to treat breast cancer may also cause early menopause. A condition called primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) happens when your ovaries stop working normally before you are age 40. But this condition is different from early menopause. If you have POI, you may still have periods, even though they might not come regularly. And you might still be able to get pregnant. What are the symptoms of menopause? During the menopausal transition, your ovaries start to make less of the estrogen and progesterone hormones. The changes in these hormones cause the symptoms of menopause, which can include: A change in your periods; they may be: Irregular, with more or less time in between periods. Shorter or longer. Lighter or heavier. Hot flashes, a sudden warm feeling in your face, neck, and chest. They may cause you to sweat . If they happen at night and cause sweating, they are called night sweats. Trouble sleeping , such as trouble falling asleep or getting back to sleep when you wake up. Over time, a lack of sleep can lead to fatigue and memory problems . Vaginal dryness, which may cause pain or discomfort during sexual intercourse. Mood changes, which can make you feel moody, anxious, or more irritable. Bladder issues, such as urinary incontinence (loss of bladder control) and urinary tract infections (UTIs). You may also have other physical changes which could put you at risk for certain diseases. For example, the loss of estrogen can: Cause you to lose bone density . This can lead to osteoporosis , a condition that causes bones to become weak and break easily. Raise your cholesterol levels and increase your risk of heart disease and stroke . What are the treatments for the symptoms of menopause? You may not need treatment for the symptoms of menopause. But if you do, there are several different types of treatments: Lifestyle changes You may find that you can manage your symptoms with lifestyle changes. Here are some changes that might make you feel better: If you have hot flashes, dress in layers that can be removed at the start of a hot flash. You may want to carry a portable fan to use when you get a hot flash. Avoid alcohol , spicy foods, and caffeine . They can make your menopause symptoms worse. If you smoke, try to quit , not only for hot flashes, but for your overall health. Try to maintain a healthy weight . Being overweight or having obesity can make hot flashes worse. Have good sleep habits . Keep your bedroom dark, quiet, and cool. Get regular exercise . It can help you sleep better, improve your mood, and help lower your risk for many age-related diseases. Lower stress , for example by using relaxation techniques such as meditation, deep breathing, and muscle relaxation exercises. If lifestyle changes are not enough to improve your symptoms, you may want to contact your health care provider. They will talk to you about your symptoms, family and medical history, and preferences. They also can explain the risks and benefits of the treatments. Non-hormone treatments There are various non-hormone treatments for menopause symptoms, such as: Medicines for hot flashes, including certain antidepressants , a medicine just for hot flashes, an antiseizure medicine, and a blood pressure medicine . Some of these medicines may also help with sleep problems. Medicines for urinary incontinence. Medicines to treat or help prevent osteoporosis. Low-dose birth control pills for very heavy bleeding or periods that are close together. Water-based lubricants to treat vaginal dryness. Medicines for painful intercourse that is caused by vaginal changes from menopause. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), a type of talk therapy, for trouble sleeping. Hormone treatments Another treatment for menopause symptoms is menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). It may also be called hormone replacement therapy (HRT). This treatment is usually with estrogen or estrogen plus progestin (a type of progesterone that's made in a lab). MHT can be given in pills, skin patches, rings, implants, gels, or creams. It may be used to treat symptoms such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness and to help prevent osteoporosis. Like all medicines, MHT has benefits and risks. Talk with your provider about whether it is safe for you. If you decide to take MHT, your provider may recommend taking the lowest dose that works for the shortest time needed. Supplements, herbs, and "natural" hormone creams There are various products that are marketed for menopause symptoms. They include supplements , herbs , and over-the-counter "natural" hormone creams. There has been research on many of these products. So far, none of them has clearly been shown to be helpful. Also, there is little information on the long-term safety of these products. Some supplements can have harmful side effects or interact with medicines. Check with your provider before you take use any of them.

Menstruation, or period, is normal vaginal bleeding that occurs as part of a woman's monthly cycle. Every month, your body prepares for pregnancy. If no pregnancy occurs, the uterus, or womb, sheds its lining. The menstrual blood is partly blood and partly tissue from inside the uterus. It passes out of the body through the vagina. Periods usually start between age 11 and 14 and continue until menopause at about age 51. They usually last from three to five days. Besides bleeding from the vagina, you may have: Abdominal or pelvic cramping pain Lower back pain Bloating and sore breasts Food cravings Mood swings and irritability Headache and fatigue Premenstrual syndrome , or PMS, is a group of symptoms that start before the period. It can include emotional and physical symptoms. Consult your health care provider if you have big changes in your cycle. They may be signs of other problems that should be treated. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

A miscarriage is an unexpected loss of pregnancy before the 20th week of pregnancy. Most miscarriages happen very early in the pregnancy, often before a woman even knows she is pregnant. Factors that may contribute to miscarriage include: A genetic problem with the fetus Problems with the uterus or cervix Chronic diseases, such as polycystic ovary syndrome Signs of a miscarriage include vaginal spotting, abdominal pain or cramping, and fluid or tissue passing from the vagina. Bleeding can be a symptom of miscarriage, but many women also have it in early pregnancy and don't miscarry. To be sure, contact your health care provider right away if you have bleeding. Women who miscarry early in their pregnancy usually do not need any treatment. In some cases, there is tissue left in the uterus. Doctors use a procedure called a dilatation and curettage (D&C) or medicines to remove the tissue. Counseling may help you cope with your grief. Later, if you do decide to try again, work closely with your health care provider to lower the risks. Many women who have a miscarriage go on to have healthy babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What is osteoporosis? Osteoporosis is a disease in which your bones become weak and are likely to fracture (break). The disease can develop when your bone mineral density and bone mass decrease. It can also happen if the structure and strength of your bones change. Osteoporosis is called a "silent" disease because it doesn't usually cause symptoms. You may not even know you have the disease until you break a bone. This could happen with any bone, but it's most common in the bones of your hip, vertebrae in the spine, and wrist. What causes osteoporosis? Your bones are made of living tissue. To keep them strong, your body breaks down old bone and replaces it with new bone. Osteoporosis develops when more bone is broken down than replaced. You lose bone mass and changes happen in the structure of your bone tissue. This can happen as you get older. Other risk factors can also lead to the development of osteoporosis or increase your chance of developing the disease. Who is more likely to develop osteoporosis? Anyone can develop osteoporosis, but you are more likely to develop it if you have one or more of risk factors: Your sex. Osteoporosis is more common in women. Your age. Your risk increases as you get older. It is most common in people over age 50. Your body size. It is more common in people who are slim and thin boned. Your race: White and Asian women are at highest risk. African American and Mexican American women have a lower risk. White men are at higher risk than African American and Mexican American men. Family history. Your risk of osteoporosis may be higher if one of your parents has osteoporosis or broke their hip. Changes to hormones . Low levels of certain hormones can increase your chance of developing osteoporosis. Diet. A diet that is low in calcium and/or vitamin D or does not include enough protein can raise your risk. Long-term use of certain medicines , such as: Corticosteroids Proton pump inhibitors (which treat GERD ) Medicines to treat epilepsy Having other medical conditions , such as: Endocrine diseases Certain digestive diseases Rheumatoid arthritis Certain types of cancer HIV Anorexia nervosa, a type of eating disorder Your lifestyle. Certain lifestyle factors can contribute to bone loss, such as: Smoking tobacco Long-term heavy alcohol use Physical inactivity or prolonged periods of bedrest What are the symptoms of osteoporosis? Osteoporosis usually doesn't cause symptoms. You may not know that you have it until you break a bone. How is osteoporosis diagnosed? Health care providers usually diagnose osteoporosis during routine screening for the disease. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for: Women over age 65 Women of any age who have factors that increase the chance of developing osteoporosis The Task Force does not recommend regular screening for men. To find out if you have osteoporosis, your provider: Will ask about your medical history and whether you have ever broken a bone May do a physical exam, which could include checking for: A loss of height and/or weight Changes in your posture Balance and gait (the way you walk) Your muscle strength Will likely order a bone density scan What are the treatments for osteoporosis? The goals for treating osteoporosis are to slow or stop bone loss and to prevent fractures. Your provider may recommend: A healthy, balanced diet that includes enough calcium, vitamin D, and protein Lifestyle changes such as quitting smoking and limiting alcohol Regular physical activity Fall prevention to help prevent fractures Medicines, such as: Medicines that slow down bone loss Medicines that help rebuild bone In addition to managing your osteoporosis, it's important to avoid activities that may cause a fracture. These can include movements that involve: Twisting your spine, like swinging a golf club Bending forward from the waist, like sit ups and toe touches You can also help reduce the risk of breaking a bone by preventing falls. Can osteoporosis be prevented? To help keep bones strong and help prevent osteoporosis, the best thing to do is to eat a healthy diet rich in calcium and vitamin D. Getting regular physical activity, limiting alcohol, and not smoking can also help. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is ovarian cancer? Cancer is a disease in which abnormal cells in the body grow out of control and form a tumor. Ovarian cancer is a cancerous tumor that forms in the tissues of an ovary. The ovaries are a pair of female reproductive glands that make eggs and female hormones . What are the types of ovarian cancer? There are a few different types of ovarian cancer. The most common type is epithelial cancer. It begins in the cells that cover the ovary. There are also two related types of epithelial cancer that can spread to the ovaries: Fallopian tube cancer forms in the tissue lining a fallopian tube. The fallopian tubes are a pair of long, slender tubes on each side of the uterus. The uterus is the female reproductive organ where a baby grows during pregnancy. Primary peritoneal cancer forms in the tissue lining the peritoneum. Your peritoneum is a tissue lining that covers the organs in the abdomen (belly). These two cancers are similar to ovarian cancer, and they have the same treatments. So some medical experts also consider those two types as ovarian cancer. Some other rarer types of ovarian cancer are malignant germ cell tumors and stromal tumors. What causes ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer happens when there are changes (mutations) in the genetic material (DNA). Often, the exact cause of these genetic changes is unknown. Most ovarian cancers are caused by genetic changes that happen during your lifetime. But sometimes these genetic changes are inherited, meaning that you are born with them. Ovarian cancer that is caused by inherited genetic changes is called hereditary ovarian cancer. There are also certain genetic changes that can raise your risk of ovarian cancer, including changes called BRCA1 and BRCA2 . These two changes also raise your risk of breast and other cancers. Besides genetics, your lifestyle and the environment can affect your risk of ovarian cancer. Who is more likely to develop ovarian cancer? Certain people are more likely to develop ovarian cancer. They include those who: Have a family history of ovarian cancer in a mother, daughter, or sister Have inherited changes in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Have certain other genetic conditions, such as Lynch syndrome Have endometriosis Took hormone replacement therapy Are overweight or have obesity Are tall Are older, especially those who have gone through menopause What are the symptoms of ovarian cancer? Ovarian cancer may not cause early signs or symptoms. By the time you do have signs or symptoms, the cancer is often advanced. The signs and symptoms may include: Pain, swelling, or a feeling of pressure in the abdomen or pelvis Sudden or frequent urge to urinate (pee) Trouble eating or feeling full A lump in the pelvic area Gastrointestinal problems, such as gas , bloating, or constipation How is ovarian cancer diagnosed? To find out if you have ovarian cancer, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Will ask about your family health history , including relatives who have had ovarian cancer Will do a physical exam , including a pelvic exam Will likely do imaging tests May do blood tests such as a CA-125 blood test Often the only way to know for sure that you have ovarian cancer is by having a biopsy of the tissue. A biopsy is done during surgery to remove the tumor. What are the treatments for ovarian cancer? Treatments for ovarian cancer may include: Surgery to remove as much of the cancer as possible Chemotherapy Targeted therapy , which uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells Your provider may suggest that you have genetic testing to look for the gene changes that raise the risk for ovarian cancer. Knowing whether or not you have the gene change may help your provider decide on your treatment plan. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. They produce a woman's eggs and make female hormones . Ovarian cysts are fluid-filled sacs in or on an ovary. They usually form during ovulation, when the ovary releases an egg. They are usually harmless and go away by themselves. Most women have them sometime during their lives. Most ovarian cysts are small and don't cause symptoms. Women may not find out that they have them until they have a pelvic exam. If there are symptoms, they may include: Pressure Bloating Swelling Pain in the lower abdomen, on the side where the cyst is If your health care provider finds a cyst, you may be able to wait to see if it gets bigger. You may need surgery if you have pain, are past menopause, or if the cyst does not go away. If a cyst bursts or causes bleeding, you should get medical help right away. Birth control pills can help prevent new cysts. Rarely, ovarian cysts can become cancerous. This risk increases as you get older. A health problem that involves ovarian cysts is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).  Women with PCOS can have high levels of male hormones, irregular or no periods, and small ovarian cysts. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

The ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. Women have two ovaries, one on each side of the uterus.  Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. The ovaries produce and store a woman's eggs. During ovulation, an ovary releases an egg. If that egg is fertilized by a sperm, a pregnancy can occur. Ovaries also make the female hormones estrogen and progesterone. When a woman goes through menopause , her ovaries stop making those hormones and releasing eggs. Problems with the ovaries include: Ovarian cancer Ovarian cysts and polycystic ovary syndrome Primary ovarian insufficiency Ovarian torsion, a twisting of the ovary

The pelvic floor is a group of muscles and other tissues that form a sling or hammock across the pelvis. In women, it holds the uterus, bladder, bowel, and other pelvic organs in place so that they can work properly.  The pelvic floor can become weak or be injured. The main causes are pregnancy and childbirth. Other causes include being overweight, radiation treatment, surgery, and getting older. Common symptoms include: Feeling heaviness, fullness, pulling, or aching in the vagina. It gets worse by the end of the day or during a bowel movement. Seeing or feeling a "bulge" or "something coming out" of the vagina Having a hard time starting to urinate or emptying the bladder completely Having frequent urinary tract infections Leaking urine when you cough, laugh, or exercise Feeling an urgent or frequent need to urinate Feeling pain while urinating Leaking stool or having a hard time controlling gas Being constipated Having a hard time making it to the bathroom in time Your health care provider diagnoses the problem with a physical exam, a pelvic exam, or special tests. Treatments include special pelvic muscle exercises called Kegel exercises. A mechanical support device called a pessary helps some women. Surgery and medicines are other treatments. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection and inflammation of the uterus, ovaries, and other female reproductive organs. It causes scarring in these organs. This can lead to infertility, ectopic pregnancy, pelvic pain, abscesses, and other serious problems. PID is the most common preventable cause of infertility in the United States. Gonorrhea and chlamydia , two sexually transmitted infections (STIs), are the most common causes of PID. Other bacteria can also cause it. You are at greater risk if you: Are sexually active and younger than 25 Have more than one sex partner Douche Some women have no symptoms. Others have pain in the lower abdomen, fever, smelly vaginal discharge, irregular bleeding, and pain during intercourse or urination. Doctors diagnose PID with a physical exam, lab tests, and imaging tests. Antibiotics can cure PID.  Early treatment is important. Waiting too long increases the risk of infertility. NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

Pelvic pain occurs mostly in the lower abdomen area. The pain might be steady, or it might come and go. It can be a sharp and stabbing pain in a specific spot, or a dull pain that is spread out. If the pain is severe, it might get in the way of your daily activities. If you're a woman, you might feel pain during your period . It could also happen when you have sex. Pelvic pain can be a sign that there is a problem with one of the organs in your pelvic area, such as the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, or vagina. If you're a man, the cause could be problem with the prostate . In men and women, it could be a symptom of infection, or a problem with the urinary tract, lower intestines, rectum, muscle, or bone. Some women have more than one cause of pelvic pain at the same time. You might have to have lab, imaging, or other medical tests to find the cause of the pain. The treatment will depend on the cause, how bad the pain is, and how often it occurs. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are painful periods? Menstruation , or period, is normal vaginal bleeding that happens as part of a woman's monthly cycle. Many women have painful periods, also called dysmenorrhea. The pain is most often menstrual cramps, which are a throbbing, cramping pain in your lower abdomen. You may also have other symptoms, such as lower back pain, nausea, diarrhea, and headaches. Period pain is not the same as premenstrual syndrome (PMS). PMS causes many different symptoms, including weight gain, bloating, irritability, and fatigue. PMS often starts one to two weeks before your period starts. What causes painful periods? There are two types of dysmenorrhea: primary and secondary. Each type has different causes. Primary dysmenorrhea is the most common kind of period pain. It is period pain that is not caused by another condition. The cause is usually having too many prostaglandins, which are chemicals that your uterus makes. These chemicals make the muscles of your uterus tighten and relax, and this causes the cramps. The pain can start a day or two before your period. It normally lasts for a few days, though in some women it can last longer. You usually first start having period pain when you are younger, just after you begin getting periods. Often, as you get older, you have less pain. The pain may also get better after you have given birth. Secondary dysmenorrhea often starts later in life. It is caused by conditions that affect your uterus or other reproductive organs, such as endometriosis and uterine fibroids . This kind of pain often gets worse over time. It may begin before your period starts and continue after your period ends. What can I do about period pain? To help ease your period pain, you can try: Using a heating pad or hot water bottle on your lower abdomen Getting some exercise Taking a hot bath Doing relaxation techniques, including yoga and meditation You might also try taking over-the-counter pain relievers such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). NSAIDs include ibuprofen and naproxen. Besides relieving pain, NSAIDs reduce the amount of prostaglandins that your uterus makes and lessen their effects.  This helps to lessen the cramps. You can take NSAIDs when you first have symptoms, or when your period starts. You can keep taking them for a few days. You should not take NSAIDS if you have ulcers or other stomach problems, bleeding problems, or liver disease. You should also not take them if you are allergic to aspirin. Always check with your health care provider if you are not sure whether or not you should take NSAIDs. It may also help to get enough rest and avoid using alcohol and tobacco. When should I get medical help for my period pain? For many women, some pain during your period is normal. However, you should contact your health care provider if: NSAIDs and self-care measures don't help, and the pain interferes with your life Your cramps suddenly get worse You are over 25 and you get severe cramps for the first time You have a fever with your period pain You have the pain even when you are not getting your period How is the cause of severe period pain diagnosed? To diagnose severe period pain, your health care provider will ask you about your medical history and do a pelvic exam. You may also have an ultrasound or other imaging test . If your health care provider thinks you have secondary dysmenorrhea, you might have laparoscopy . It is a surgery that that lets your health care provider look inside your body. What are treatments for severe period pain? If your period pain is primary dysmenorrhea and you need medical treatment, your health care provider might suggest using hormonal birth control, such as the pill, patch, ring, or IUD. Another treatment option might be prescription pain relievers. If you have secondary dysmenorrhea, your treatment depends upon the condition that is causing the problem. In some cases, you may need surgery.

What is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the name for set of symptoms that are related to an imbalance of hormones . PCOS affects the ovaries, as well as many other parts of the body. People with PCOS usually have at least two of these problems: Not ovulating. Normally, your ovaries make the egg that is released each month as part of a healthy menstrual cycle . This is called ovulation. But with PCOS, the egg may not develop as it should, or it may not be released during ovulation. Your periods may be irregular, or you may not have them at all. High levels of androgens. Androgens are hormones that are important for normal male sexual development. Women normally make smaller amounts of androgens. Having higher levels of androgens can cause you to have extra body or facial hair (called hirsutism). Cysts in one or both ovaries. Cysts are growths that are small, fluid-filled sacs. What causes polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? The exact cause of PCOS in unknown. Research has shown that different factors may play a role, including: Genetics . PCOS tends to run in families. Imbalances in androgen levels. Insulin resistance. This is a condition in which your body can't use insulin properly. Insulin is a hormone that helps move blood glucose (sugar) into your cells to give them energy. Insulin resistance can lead to high blood glucose levels. What are the symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? PCOS often develops as young as age 11 or 12, around the time of your first period. But you can develop it later. The symptoms can vary from person to person. Some people have few or even no symptoms. They may not realize they have PCOS until they have trouble getting pregnant. Other people may have more severe symptoms. The symptoms of PCOS may include: Irregular or missed menstrual periods. Too much hair on the face, chest, stomach, or thighs. Obesity , weight gain, or trouble losing weight. Severe acne which may be hard to treat. Oily skin. Patches of thickened dark skin (called acanthosis nigricans). Infertility . PCOS is one of the most common causes of infertility. But many people with PCOS can still get pregnant. What other health problems are linked to polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? PCOS is linked to many other health problems, including: Insulin resistance, which can lead to prediabetes and type 2 diabetes . Heart disease . Having PCOS increases your risk, and this risk goes up as you age. High blood pressure . High LDL ("bad") cholesterol and low HDL ("good") cholesterol . This increases your risk of heart disease . Sleep apnea , a disorder that causes you to repeatedly stop breathing during sleep. Depression and anxiety . Although there are links between PCOS and these conditions, researchers do not know whether: PCOS causes some of these problems Some of these problems cause PCOS, or There are other conditions that cause both PCOS and these other health problems Not everyone who has PCOS will have all these problems. However, you and your health care provider may want to monitor your health for signs of them, so they can be treated early. How is polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) diagnosed? There is no specific test for PCOS. To find out if you have PCOS, your provider: Will do a physical exam, which will include looking for the physical signs of PCOS. Will ask about your medical history and family health history. May do a pelvic exam to check for signs of extra male hormones and to see if your ovaries are enlarged or swollen. May order a pelvic ultrasound to look for cysts on your ovaries and check the thickness of your endometrium (the lining of your uterus, or womb). May order blood tests, including tests to check your hormone levels. What are the treatments for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)? There is no cure for PCOS, but treatments can help you manage your symptoms. The treatments may include: Lifestyle changes, which can help reduce many symptoms. They can also lower your risk for or help manage related health problems. These changes include: Maintaining a healthy weight Getting regular physical activity Eating healthy foods Medicines: Hormonal birth control , such as pills, shots, and IUDs, can make your period more regular. They may also help remove acne and extra facial and body hair. But you would only use them if you don't want to get pregnant. Anti-androgen medicines, which block the effect of androgens. This can help reduce hair loss on your head, the growth of facial and body hair, and acne. Providers do use them to help with these symptoms, but anti-androgen medicines are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat PCOS. These medicines can cause problems during pregnancy. Your provider may have you take them with birth control (to prevent pregnancy). Insulin-sensitizing medicines, which are medicines that are used to treat type 2 diabetes. They improve insulin resistance and keep your blood glucose levels steady. They may also lower your androgen levels. They are not approved by the FDA to treat PCOS. But they may help with your symptoms. Medicines for acne. These medicines come in pills, creams, or gels. Treatments for hair removal, such as facial hair removal creams, laser hair removal, and electrolysis. Fertility treatments if you are having trouble getting pregnant. They include medicines and procedures such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) .

Taking home a new baby is one of the happiest times in a woman's life.  But it also presents both physical and emotional challenges.  : Get as much rest as possible. You may find that all you can do is eat, sleep, and care for your baby. And that is perfectly okay. You will have spotting or bleeding, like a menstrual period, off and on for up to six weeks. You might also have swelling in your legs and feet, feel constipated, have menstrual-like cramping. Even if you are not breastfeeding, you can have milk leaking from your nipples, and your breasts might feel full, tender, or uncomfortable. Follow your doctor's instructions on how much activity, like climbing stairs or walking, you can do for the next few weeks. Doctors usually recommend that you abstain from sexual intercourse for four to six weeks after birth. In addition to physical changes, you may feel sad or have the "baby blues."  If you are extremely sad or are unable to care for yourself or your baby, you might have a serious condition called postpartum depression . Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Many women have the baby blues after childbirth. If you have the baby blues, you may have mood swings, feel sad, anxious or overwhelmed, have crying spells, lose your appetite, or have trouble sleeping. The baby blues most often go away within a few days or a week. The symptoms are not severe and do not need treatment. The symptoms of postpartum depression last longer and are more severe.   You may also feel hopeless and worthless and lose interest in the baby. You may have thoughts of hurting yourself or the baby. Very rarely, new mothers develop something even more serious. They may have hallucinations or try to hurt themselves or the baby. They need to get treatment right away, often in the hospital. Postpartum depression can begin anytime within the first year after childbirth. The cause is unknown. Hormonal and physical changes after birth and the stress of caring for a new baby may play a role. Women who have had depression are at higher risk. If you think you have postpartum depression, tell your health care provider. Medicines, including antidepressants , and talk therapy can help you get well. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

If you are trying to have a baby or are just thinking about it, it is not too early to prepare for a safe pregnancy and a healthy baby. You should see your health care provider for preconception care. Preconception care is care you receive before you get pregnant. Your health care provider can help you figure out which steps you need to take now, such as: Finding and taking care of any problems that might affect you and your baby later, like diabetes or high blood pressure Increasing the amount of folic acid you get to prevent neural tube defects Getting up to date on vaccines Avoiding smoking, drinking alcohol, or taking drugs Trying to reach a healthy weight By taking action on health issues before pregnancy, you can prevent many future problems for yourself and your baby. Once you're pregnant,  you'll get prenatal care until your baby is born. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

You're going to have a baby! It's an exciting time, but it can also feel a bit overwhelming.  You may have a lot of questions, including what you can do to give your baby a healthy start. To keep you and your baby healthy during pregnancy, it is important to: Have regular visits with your health care provider. These prenatal care visits help make sure that you and your baby are healthy. And if there are any health problems, your provider can find them early. Getting treatment right away can cure many problems and prevent others. Eat healthy and drink plenty of water. Good nutrition during pregnancy includes eating a variety of: Fruits Vegetables Whole grains Lean meats or other protein sources Low-fat dairy products Take prenatal vitamins. During pregnancy, you need higher amounts of certain vitamins and minerals, such as folic acid and iron . Be careful with medicines. Always check with your provider before you start or stop any medicine . This includes over-the-counter medicines and dietary or herbal supplements. Stay active. Physical activity can help you stay strong, feel and sleep better, and prepare your body for birth. Check with your provider about which types of activities are right for you. Avoid substances that could hurt your baby , including alcohol, drugs, and tobacco . Your body will keep changing as your baby grows . It can be hard to know whether a new symptom is normal or could be a sign of a problem . Check with your provider if something is bothering or worrying you.

What is premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? Premenstrual syndrome, or PMS, is a group of physical and emotional symptoms that start one to two weeks before your period . Most women have at least some symptoms of PMS, and the symptoms go away after their periods start. The symptoms may range from mild to severe. What is premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD)? Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a severe type of PMS. With PMDD, the symptoms are severe enough to interfere with your life.  PMDD much less common than PMS. What causes premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? Researchers don't know exactly what causes PMS. Changes in hormone levels during the menstrual cycle may play a role. These changing hormone levels may affect some women more than others. What are the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? PMS symptoms are different for everyone. You may get physical symptoms, emotional symptoms, or both. Your symptoms may also change throughout your life. Physical symptoms may include: Breast swelling and tenderness Acne Bloating and weight gain Headache Joint pain Backache Constipation or diarrhea Food cravings Emotional symptoms may include: Irritability Mood swings Crying spells Depression Anxiety Sleeping too much or too little Trouble with concentration and memory Less interest in sex How is premenstrual syndrome (PMS) diagnosed? You may wish to see your health care provider if your symptoms bother you or affect your daily life. There is no single test for PMS. Your provider will talk with you about your symptoms, including when they happen and how much they affect your life.  To be diagnosed with PMS, your symptoms must: Happen in the five days before your period for at least three menstrual cycles in a row End within four days after your period starts Keep you from enjoying or doing some of your normal activities Your provider may wish to do tests to rule out other conditions which may cause similar symptoms. What are the treatments for premenstrual syndrome (PMS)? No single PMS treatment works for everyone. If your symptoms are not severe, you may be able to manage them with: Over-the-counter pain relievers such as ibuprofen, aspirin, or naproxen, to help ease cramps, headaches, backaches, and breast tenderness Getting regular exercise Getting enough sleep Eating healthy foods Avoiding salt , caffeine , sugar, and alcohol in the two weeks before your period Some studies have shown that certain vitamins may help with some symptoms of PMS. They include calcium and vitamin B6 . Some women take certain herbal supplements for PMS symptoms. But there is not enough evidence to prove that supplements are effective for PMS. Check with your provider before taking any vitamins or supplements. If you are not able to manage your PMS symptoms, your provider may suggest prescription medicines. These medicines may also be used to treat PMDD. They include: Hormonal birth control , which may help with the physical symptoms of PMS. But sometimes they may make the emotional symptoms worse. You may need to try several different types of birth control before you find the right one. Antidepressants , such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which may help with emotional symptoms. Diuretics ("water pills") to reduce symptoms of bloating and breast tenderness. Anti-anxiety medicine to ease symptoms of anxiety. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Prenatal care is the health care you get while you are pregnant . It includes your checkups and prenatal testing .  
Prenatal care can help keep you and your baby healthy. It lets your health care provider spot health problems early. Early treatment can cure many problems and prevent others. Your doctor or midwife will give you a schedule for your prenatal visits. If you are over 35 years old or your pregnancy is high risk because of health problems like diabetes or high blood pressure , your doctor or midwife will probably want to see you more often. You can also expect to see your health care provider more often as your due date gets closer. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI), also known as premature ovarian failure, happens when a woman's ovaries stop working normally before she is 40. Many women naturally experience reduced fertility when they are about 40 years old. They may start getting irregular menstrual periods as they transition to menopause. For women with POI, irregular periods and reduced fertility start before the age of 40. Sometimes it can start as early as the teenage years. POI is different from premature menopause . With premature menopause, your periods stop before age 40. You can no longer get pregnant. The cause can be natural or it can be a disease, surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. With POI, some women still have occasional periods. They may even get pregnant.  In most cases of POI, the cause is unknown. What causes primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? In about 90% of cases, the exact cause of POI is unknown. Research shows that POI is related to problems with the follicles. Follicles are small sacs in your ovaries. Your eggs grow and mature inside them. One type of follicle problem is that you run out of working follicles earlier than normal. Another is that the follicles are not working properly. In most cases, the cause of the follicle problem is unknown. But sometimes the cause may be: Genetic disorders such as Fragile X syndrome and Turner syndrome A low number of follicles Autoimmune diseases, including thyroiditis and Addison disease Chemotherapy or radiation therapy Metabolic disorders Toxins, such as cigarette smoke , chemicals, and pesticides Who is at risk for primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? Certain factors can raise a woman's risk of POI: Family history. Women who have a mother or sister with POI are more likely to have it. Genes. Some changes to genes and genetic conditions put women at higher risk for POI. For example, women Fragile X syndrome or Turner syndrome are at higher risk. Certain diseases, such as autoimmune diseases and viral infections Cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy Age. Younger women can get POI, but it becomes more common between the ages of 35-40. What are the symptoms of primary ovarian insufficiency (POI)? The first sign of POI is usually irregular or missed periods. Later symptoms may be similar to those of natural menopause: Hot flashes Night sweats Irritability Poor concentration Decreased sex drive Pain during sex Vaginal dryness For many women with POI, trouble getting pregnant or infertility is the reason they go to their health care provider. What other problems can primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) cause? Since POI causes you to have lower levels of certain hormones, you are at greater risk for other health conditions, including: Anxiety and depression. Hormonal changes caused by POI can contribute to anxiety or lead to depression . Dry eye syndrome and eye surface disease. Some women with POI have one of these eye conditions. Both can cause discomfort and may lead to blurred vision. If not treated, these conditions can cause permanent eye damage. Heart disease. Lower levels of estrogen can affect the muscles lining the arteries and can increase the buildup of cholesterol in the arteries. These factors increase your risk of atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries). Infertility. Low thyroid function. This problem also is called hypothyroidism . The thyroid is a gland that makes hormones that control your body's metabolism and energy level. Low levels thyroid hormones can affect your metabolism and can cause very low energy, mental sluggishness, and other symptoms. Osteoporosis. The hormone estrogen helps keep bones strong. Without enough estrogen, women with POI often develop osteoporosis . It is a bone disease that causes weak, brittle bones that are more likely to break . How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) diagnosed? To diagnose POI, your health care provider may do: A medical history, including asking whether you have relatives with POI A pregnancy test, to make sure that you are not pregnant A physical exam, to look for signs of other disorders which could be causing your symptoms Blood tests, to check for certain hormone levels. You may also have a blood test to do a chromosome analysis. A chromosome is the part of a cell that contains genetic information. A pelvic ultrasound, to see whether or not the ovaries are enlarged or have multiple follicles How is primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) treated? Currently, there is no proven treatment to restore normal function to a woman's ovaries.  But there are treatments for some of the symptoms of POI. There are also ways to lower your health risks and treat the conditions that POI can cause: Hormone replacement therapy (HRT). HRT is the most common treatment. It gives your body the estrogen and other hormones that your ovaries are not making. HRT improves sexual health and decreases the risks for heart disease and osteoporosis. You usually take it until about age 50; that's about the age when menopause usually begins. Calcium and vitamin D supplements. Because women with POI are at higher risk for osteoporosis, you should take calcium and vitamin D every day. In vitro fertilization (IVF). If you have POI and you wish to become pregnant, you may consider trying IVF . Regular physical activity and a healthy body weight. Getting regular exercise and controlling your weight can lower your risk for osteoporosis and heart disease. Treatments for associated conditions. If you have a condition that is related to POI, it is important to treat that as well. Treatments may involve medicines and hormones. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy . If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start. Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides. Use good hygiene , including handwashing. If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures.

What is sexual assault? Sexual assault is any kind of sexual activity, contact, or experience that happens without your consent. That means the sexual activity happens even though you don't agree to it. Sexual assault may happen with: Physical force or threats of force Sexual coercion (being pressured, tricked, threatened, or forced in a nonphysical way) Alcohol or drugs, including date rape drugs Sexual assault may also be called sexual violence or sexual abuse. It affects millions of people each year. Anyone can be a victim of sexual assault. Many victims first experience sexual assault during childhood . Most victims are girls and women. But many boys and men are also victims of sexual assault. If you've been sexually assaulted, it's never your fault. It's something that happens to you. What does sexual assault include? Sexual assault is any unwanted sexual activity, including: Sexual activity with physical contact , which is everything from sexual touching or kissing to rape or attempted rape Sexual activity without physical contact , which includes things that may happen in person, online, or through texts, such as: "Flashing" or exhibitionism (when someone shows you their genitals without asking you for permission) Being forced to look at sexual images or pose for sexual photos Being sent unwanted texts with sexual photos or messages Voyeurism (when someone watches private sexual acts without permission) Getting sexual threats or being sexually harassed (unwelcome sexual comments, requests for sexual favors, or other sexual behavior that's ongoing) Any sexual activity that happens without your consent is sexual assault. What does "consent" mean? Giving your consent means that you clearly and freely say "yes" to sexual activity. Your consent means that you: Know and understand what's going on. Can say what you want to do and don't want to do. Are not underage. Are not being pressured or tricked to do things you don't want to do. Giving consent is not : Silence. Not saying "no" doesn't mean you're saying "yes." Having consented in the past. Having said "yes" to sex with someone in the past doesn't mean that you've agreed to all sexual activity in the future. That's true when you're dating or in a lasting relationship. Being passive and not fighting off an attacker. You cannot give consent if you are: Drugged, drunk, passed out, or asleep. Mentally unable to consent due to illness or disability. Underage (States have different laws about how old you must be to give legal consent to sexual activity.). Sexually coerced. This means that someone is pressuring you to participate in sexual activity. Agreeing to sex under pressure is not giving consent. The pressure may include: Abusing power over you, for example, a boss threatening your job. Making threats to harm people you care about. Making false promises to reward you for sex. Threatening to end a relationship or spread rumors about you. Wearing you down by constantly asking for sex or making you feel guilty or obligated. Who commits sexual assault? Both men and women commit sexual assault. A person who commits sexual assault may be a stranger, but more often it's someone you know, for example: A friend or acquaintance Someone you work with A neighbor A family member A current or past romantic partner, including a spouse What are the possible health effects from sexual assault? Sexual assault may have many health effects. Many of them can affect your lifelong health and well-being. The effects may include: Physical effects such as: Bruises or genital injuries Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Pregnancy Ongoing problems with: Female reproductive health Digestive disorders Your heart Sexual health Psychological effects such as: Depression or anxiety Thoughts about suicide Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Sexual assault victims are more likely to smoke , have  an alcohol use disorder (AUD) , use illegal drugs , and have risky sexual behavior. Girls who experience sexual violence are more likely to become victims of intimate partner violence in adulthood. What can I do if I'm a victim of sexual assault? If you are in danger or need medical care, call 911. If you can, get away from the person who assaulted you and get to a safe place as fast as you can. You can call the National Sexual Assault Hotline at 800-656-HOPE (4673) to connect with a sexual assault service provider in your area who can direct you to local resources. Getting support after a sexual assault may help you cope better and reduce the long-term effects. Victim services like rape crisis centers may provide a safe, healing place where you can find support. Studies show that treatments such as Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TF-CBT) can help victims cope with depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Can sexual assault be prevented? Sexual assault is never the victim's fault. No one who has been assaulted should be blamed for something that they did or did not do. You can take some steps to try to be safer around others: Go to parties with friends. Look out for each other. If a friend seems drunk or drugged, get them to a safe place. Have a plan for how you'll get home, too. Keep control of your drink. Someone could add alcohol or put a drug in it without you knowing. Meet people for the first time in a public place. Listen to your "gut feelings." If you feel uncomfortable around someone, leave. Pay attention to your surroundings. When walking alone, stay in busy well-lit areas. And don't wear headphones; you want to be able to hear what's happening around you. Centers for Disease and Control and Prevention

Sexuality is a big part of being human. Love, affection and sexual intimacy all play a role in healthy relationships. They also contribute to your sense of well-being. A number of disorders can affect the ability to have or enjoy sex  in both men and women . Factors that can affect sexual health include: Fear of unplanned pregnancy Concerns about infertility Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Chronic diseases such as cancer or heart disease Medicines that affect sexual desire or performance

What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are infections that are passed from one person to another through sexual contact. They are usually spread during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. But sometimes they can spread through other sexual contact involving the penis, vagina, mouth, or anus. This is because some STIs, like herpes and HPV, are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Some STIs can be passed from a pregnant person to the baby, either during pregnancy or when giving birth. Other ways that some STIs may be spread include during breastfeeding , through blood transfusions , or by sharing needles. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis What causes sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs can be caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites . Who is affected by sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Most STIs affect both men and women, but in many cases the health problems they cause can be more severe for 
women. If an STI is passed to a baby, it can cause serious health problems. What are the symptoms of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs don't always cause symptoms or may only cause mild symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection and not know it. And even without symptoms, STIs can still be harmful and may be passed on during sex. If there are symptoms, they could include: Unusual discharge from the penis or vagina Sores or warts on the genital area Painful or frequent urination (peeing) Itching and redness in the genital area Blisters or sores in or around the mouth Abnormal vaginal odor Anal itching, soreness, or bleeding Abdominal (belly) pain Fever How are sexually transmitted infections (STIs) diagnosed? If you are sexually active, you should talk to your health care provider about your risk for STIs and whether you need to be tested. This is especially important since many STIs do not usually cause symptoms. Some STIs may be diagnosed during a physical exam or through STI testing . Some tests involve a microscopic examination of a sore or fluid swabbed from the vagina, penis, or anus. Blood tests can diagnose other types of STIs. What are the treatments for sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Antibiotics can treat STIs that are caused by bacteria or parasites. There is no cure for STIs caused by viruses, but antiviral medicines can often help with the symptoms and lower your risk of spreading the infection. It's important to get treatment if you have an STI. Some types of STIs can cause serious health problems if they are not treated. Can sexually transmitted infections (STIs) be prevented? The surest way to protect yourself against STIs is to not have sex. If you do decide to have sex, you can lower your risk of getting an STI by: Having you and your partner tested for STIs before having sex. Using a condom every time you have sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading STIs. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Reducing your number of sex partners. You might even consider "mutual monogamy" with just one partner. This means that you agree to be sexually active only with them, and they agree to be sexually active only with you. But first you should both get tested to make sure that you don't already have an STI. Getting vaccinated against HPV and hepatitis B .

There are many problems that can keep a woman from enjoying sex. They include: Lack of sexual desire Inability to become aroused Lack of orgasm, or sexual climax Painful intercourse These problems may have physical or psychological causes. Physical causes may include conditions like diabetes, heart disease, nerve disorders, or hormone problems. Some drugs can also affect desire and function. Psychological causes may include work-related stress and anxiety. They may also include depression or concerns about marriage or relationship problems. For some women, the problem results from past sexual trauma. Occasional problems with sexual function are common. If problems last more than a few months or cause distress for you or your partner, you should see your health care provider.

If a woman loses a pregnancy after she's past her 20th week, it's called a stillbirth. Stillbirths are due to natural causes. They can happen before delivery or during delivery. Causes include: Problems with the placenta, the organ that transports oxygen and nutrients to the fetus Genetic problems with the fetus Fetal infections Other physical problems in the fetus In at least half of all cases, it is not possible to tell why the baby died. If stillbirth happens before delivery, your health care provider may induce labor or perform a Cesarean section to deliver the fetus.  In some cases, you can wait until you go into labor yourself.  This usually happens within two weeks of stillbirth. Counseling may help you cope with your grief. Later, if you do decide to try again, work closely with your health care provider to lower the risks. Many women who have a stillbirth go on to have healthy babies. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Most teenage girls don't plan to get pregnant , but many do. Teen pregnancies carry extra health risks to both the mother and the baby. Often, teens don't get prenatal care soon enough, which can lead to problems later on. They have a higher risk for pregnancy-related high blood pressure and its complications. Risks for the baby include premature birth and a low birth weight . If you're a pregnant teen, you can help yourself and your baby by: Getting regular prenatal care Taking your prenatal vitamins for your health and to prevent some birth defects Avoiding smoking, alcohol, and drugs Using a condom, if you are having sex, to prevent sexually transmitted infections (STIs) that could hurt your baby. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms.

Tubal ligation (getting your "tubes tied") is a type of surgery. It prevents a woman from getting pregnant. It is a permanent form of birth control , and is effective right away. The surgery cuts, ties, or seals the fallopian tubes. This blocks the path between the ovaries and the uterus. The sperm cannot reach the egg to fertilize it, and the egg cannot reach the uterus. You get the surgery in a hospital or outpatient surgical center. It usually takes about 30 minutes. Almost all women go home the same day. They can return to most normal activities within a few days. Tubal ligation can sometimes be reversed. The reversal is major surgery, and does not always work.

The uterus , or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a women is pregnant. There are different types of uterine cancer. The most common type starts in the endometrium, the lining of the uterus. This type is also called endometrial cancer. The symptoms of uterine cancer include: Abnormal vaginal bleeding or discharge Trouble urinating Pelvic pain Pain during intercourse Uterine cancer usually happens after menopause. It is more common in women who have obesity. You also have a higher risk if you took estrogen-only hormone replacement therapy (menopausal hormone therapy) for many years. Tests to find uterine cancer include a pelvic exam, imaging tests, and a biopsy. The most common treatment is a hysterectomy , which is surgery to remove the uterus. Sometimes the surgery also removes the ovaries and fallopian tubes. Other treatments include hormone therapy, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. Some women get more than one type of treatment. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The uterus, or womb, is the place where a baby grows when a woman is pregnant. The first sign of a problem with the uterus may be bleeding between periods or after sex. Causes can include hormones, thyroid problems, fibroids , polyps, cancer , infection, or pregnancy. Treatment depends on the cause. Sometimes birth control pills treat hormonal imbalances. If a thyroid problem is the cause, treating it may also stop the bleeding. If you have cancer or hyperplasia, an overgrowth of normal cells in the uterus, you may need surgery. With two other uterine problems, tissue that normally lines the uterus grows where it is not supposed to.  In endometriosis , it grows outside the uterus.  In adenomyosis, it grows in the uterus's outside walls. Pain medicine may help. Other treatments include hormones and surgery.

Uterine fibroids are the most common benign tumors in women of childbearing age. Fibroids are made of muscle cells and other tissues that grow in and around the wall of the uterus, or womb. The cause of fibroids is unknown. Risk factors include being African American or being overweight. Many women with fibroids have no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they may include: Heavy or painful periods or bleeding between periods Feeling "full" in the lower abdomen Urinating often Pain during sex Lower back pain Reproductive problems, such as infertility, multiple miscarriages or early labor Your health care provider may find fibroids during a gynecological exam or by using imaging tests.  Treatment includes drugs that can slow or stop their growth, or surgery.  If you have no symptoms, you may not even need treatment. Many women with fibroids can get pregnant naturally. For those who cannot, infertility treatments may help. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Menstruation, or period, is a woman's monthly bleeding. Abnormal vaginal bleeding is different from normal menstrual periods. It could be bleeding that is between periods, is very heavy, or lasts much longer than usual. It also includes bleeding that happens before puberty or after menopause. Causes can include: Uterine fibroids or polyps Hormone problems Hormone pills, such as birth control pills and hormone replacement therapy (menopausal hormone therapy) Cancer of the cervix , ovaries , uterus or vagina Thyroid problems Bleeding during pregnancy can have several different causes. It is not always serious, but to be safe you should contact your health care provider right away. Pelvic exams, blood tests, imaging tests , and other procedures can help your health care provider diagnose the problem. Treatment depends on the cause. Treatments may include medicines, hormones, and surgery.

Vaginal cancer is a rare type of cancer. It is more common in women 60 and older. You are also more likely to get it if you have had a human papillomavirus ( HPV ) infection or if your mother took diethylstilbestrol (DES) when she was pregnant. Doctors prescribed DES in the 1950's to prevent miscarriages. You are also at higher risk if you have had abnormal cells in the vagina, cervix, or uterus. It often doesn't have early symptoms. However, see your doctor if you notice: Bleeding that is not your period A vaginal lump Pelvic pain A Pap test can find abnormal cells that may be cancer. Vaginal cancer can often be cured in its early stages. Treatment might include surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Vaginal problems are some of the most common reasons women go to the doctor. They may have symptoms such as: Itching Burning Pain Abnormal bleeding Discharge One common problem is vaginitis , an inflammation of the vagina.  Other problems that affect the vagina include sexually transmitted infections (STIs), vaginal cancer , and vulvar cancer . Treatment of vaginal problems depends on the cause.

What is vaginitis? Vaginitis, also called vulvovaginitis, is an inflammation or infection of the vagina. It can also affect the vulva, which is the external part of a woman's genitals. Vaginitis can cause itching, pain, discharge, and odor. Vaginitis is common, especially in women in their reproductive years.  It usually happens when there is a change in the balance of bacteria or yeast that are normally found in your vagina. There are different types of vaginitis, and they have different causes, symptoms, and treatments. What  causes vaginitis? Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is the most common vaginal infection in women ages 15-44. It happens when there is an imbalance between the "good" and "harmful" bacteria that are normally found in a woman's vagina. Many things can change the balance of bacteria, including: Taking antibiotics Douching Using an intrauterine device (IUD) Having unprotected sex with a new partner Having many sexual partners Yeast infections (candidiasis) happen when too much candida grows in the vagina. Candida is the scientific name for yeast. It is a fungus that lives almost everywhere, including in your body. You may have too much growing in the vagina because of: Antibiotics Pregnancy Diabetes, especially if it is not well-controlled Corticosteroid medicines Trichomoniasis can also cause vaginitis. Trichomoniasis is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI). It is caused by a parasite. You can also have vaginitis if you are allergic or sensitive to certain products that you use. Examples include vaginal sprays, douches, spermicides, soaps, detergents, or fabric softeners. They can cause burning, itching, and discharge. Hormonal changes can also cause vaginal irritation. Examples are when you are pregnant or breastfeeding, or when you have gone through menopause. Sometimes you can have more than one cause of vaginitis at the same time. What are the symptoms of vaginitis? The symptoms of vaginitis depend on which type you have. With BV, you may not have symptoms. You could have a thin white or gray vaginal discharge. There may be an odor, such as a strong fish-like odor, especially after sex. Yeast infections produce a thick, white discharge from the vagina that can look like cottage cheese. The discharge can be watery and often has no smell. Yeast infections usually cause the vagina and vulva to become itchy and red. You may not have symptoms when you have trichomoniasis. If you do have them, they include itching, burning, and soreness of the vagina and vulva. You may have burning during urination. You could also have gray-green discharge, which may smell bad. How is the cause of vaginitis diagnosed? To find out the cause of your symptoms, your health care provider may: Ask you about your medical history Do a pelvic exam Look for vaginal discharge, noting its color, qualities, and any odor Study a sample of your vaginal fluid under a microscope In some cases, you may need more tests. What are the treatments for vaginitis? The treatment depends on which type of vaginitis you have. BV is treatable with antibiotics . You may get pills to swallow, or cream or gel that you put in your vagina. During treatment, you should use a condom during sex or not have sex at all. Yeast infections are usually treated with a cream or with medicine that you put inside your vagina. You can buy over-the-counter treatments for yeast infections, but you need to be sure that you do have a yeast infection and not another type of vaginitis. See your health care provider if this is the first time you have had symptoms. Even if you have had yeast infections before, it is a good idea to call your health care provider before using an over-the-counter treatment. The treatment for trichomoniasis is usually a single-dose antibiotic. Both you and your partner(s) should be treated, to prevent spreading the infection to others and to keep from getting it again. If your vaginitis is due to an allergy or sensitivity to a product, you need to figure out which product is causing the problem. It could be a product that you started using recently. Once you figure it out, you should stop using the product. If the cause of your vaginitis is a hormonal change, your health care provider may give you estrogen cream to help with your symptoms. Can vaginitis cause other health problems? It is important to treat BV and trichomoniasis, because having either of them can increase your risk for getting HIV or another STI. If you are pregnant, BV or trichomoniasis can increase your risk for preterm labor and preterm birth. Can vaginitis be prevented? To help prevent vaginitis: Do not douche or use vaginal sprays. Use a latex condom when having sex. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Avoid clothes that hold in heat and moisture. Wear cotton underwear.

Vulvar cancer is a rare type of cancer. It forms in a woman's external genitals, called the vulva. The cancer usually grows slowly over several years. First, precancerous cells grow on vulvar skin. This is called vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), or dysplasia. Not all VIN cases turn into cancer, but it is best to treat it early. Often, vulvar cancer doesn't cause symptoms at first. However, see your doctor for testing if you notice: A lump in the vulva Vulvar itching or tenderness Bleeding that is not your period Changes in the vulvar skin, such as color changes or growths that look like a wart or ulcer You are at greater risk if you've had a human papillomavirus (HPV) infection or have a history of genital warts. Your health care provider diagnoses vulvar cancer with a physical exam and a biopsy. Treatment varies, depending on your overall health and how advanced the cancer is. It might include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or biologic therapy. Biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. NIH: National Cancer Institute

The vulva is the external part of a woman's genitals. Some problems you can have with the vulvar area include: Vaginitis or vulvovaginitis, swelling or infection of the vulva and vagina Skin problems due to allergy Vulvar cancer Vulvodynia, or vulvar pain Symptoms may include redness, itching, pain, or cracks in the skin. Treatment depends on the cause.

Women have unique health issues. And some of the health issues that affect both men and women can affect women differently. Unique issues include pregnancy , menopause , and conditions of the female organs. Women can have a healthy pregnancy by getting early and regular prenatal care . They should also get recommended breast cancer, cervical cancer , and bone density screenings. Women and men also have many of the same health problems. But these problems can affect women differently. For example: Women are more likely to die following a heart attack than men Women are more likely to show signs of depression and anxiety than men The effects of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) can be more serious in women Osteoarthritis affects more women than men Women are more likely to have urinary tract problems NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Regular checkups with your health care provider are different from appointments for sickness or injury. Your checkups, which are also called well-woman exams, include physical exams as well as preventive care. They can help find health problems early, when they may be easier to treat. Your checkup will include screenings for chronic diseases. As a woman, you may also get special exams and screenings, such as: A pelvic exam to check the health of your reproductive organs. The provider will look at your vulva, vagina, and cervix. They will also do an internal exam to feel the size and shape of your internal organs such as the uterus and ovaries. A cervical cancer screening , which uses a Pap test , an HPV test , or both. The tests can help prevent cervical cancer . A Pap test checks for cervical cancer and for abnormal cells that could turn into cancer. An HPV test looks for the types of HPV which can cause cervical cancer. For both tests, your provider will take a sample of cells from the surface of your cervix and send them to a lab to be examined under a microscope. A clinical breast exam to check for breast cancer . The provider will feel and look at your breasts and armpit area for lumps or other changes. Which tests you get and how often you need them will depend on your age, overall health, and family health history . In some cases, your provider may also recommend other tests as well. For example, if you have a family history of certain cancers, your provider may recommend genetic testing . During your checkup, you and your provider may also talk about other issues, such as: Birth control or family planning Menopause Menstrual concerns Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Vaccines Your overall health, including suggestions on how to have a healthy lifestyle To make the most of your next checkup, bring a list of any questions or concerns you have, so you can talk about them with your provider.

A bioterrorism attack is the deliberate release of viruses, bacteria, or other germs to cause illness or death. These germs are often found in nature. But they can sometimes be made more harmful by increasing their ability to cause disease, spread, or resist medical treatment. Biological agents spread through the air, water, or in food. Some can also spread from person to person. They can be very hard to detect. They don't cause illness for several hours or days. Scientists worry that anthrax , botulism , Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever viruses, plague , or smallpox could be used as biological agents. Biodefense uses medical measures to protect people against bioterrorism. This includes medicines and vaccinations. It also includes medical research and preparations to defend against bioterrorist attacks. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

When a hazardous chemical has been released, it may harm people's health. Chemical releases can be unintentional, as in the case of an industrial accident. They could also be planned, as in the case of a terrorist attack with a chemical weapon. Some hazardous chemicals have been developed by military organizations for use in warfare. Examples are nerve agents such as sarin and VX. Many hazardous chemicals are used in industry - for example, chlorine, ammonia, and benzene. Some can be made from everyday items such as household cleaners. Although there are no guarantees of safety during a chemical emergency, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

No matter how well you have prepared , you might feel dazed or numb after going through a disaster. You may also feel sad, helpless, or anxious. In spite of the tragedy, you might just feel happy to be alive. It is not unusual to have bad memories or dreams. You may avoid places or people that remind you of the disaster. You might have trouble sleeping, eating, or paying attention. Many people have short tempers and get angry easily. These are all normal reactions to stress . Sometimes the stress can be too much to handle alone. Some people have long-term problems after a disaster, including: Post-traumatic stress disorder Depression Self-blame Suicidal thoughts Alcohol or drug misuse If your emotional reactions are getting in the way of your relationships, work, or other important activities, talk to a counselor or your health care provider. Treatments are available. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Preparing for a disaster can reduce the fear, anxiety and losses that disasters cause. A disaster can be a  natural disaster, like a hurricane , tornado , flood or earthquake . It might also be  man-made, like a bioterrorist attack or chemical spill . You should know the risks and danger signs of different types of disasters. You should also have a disaster plan. Be ready to evacuate your home, and know how to treat basic medical problems. Make sure you have the insurance you need, including special types, like flood insurance. No matter what kind of disaster you experience, it causes emotional distress . After a disaster, recovery can take time. Stay connected to your family and friends during this period. Federal Emergency Management Agency

An earthquake happens when two blocks of the earth suddenly slip past one another.  Earthquakes strike suddenly, violently, and without warning at any time of the day or night. If an earthquake occurs in a populated area, it may cause property damage, injuries, and even deaths. If you live in a coastal area, there is the possibility of a tsunami . Damage from earthquakes can also lead to floods or fires . Although there are no guarantees of safety during an earthquake, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Federal Emergency Management Agency

Floods are common in the United States.  Weather such as heavy rain, thunderstorms, hurricanes , or tsunamis can cause flooding.  Flooding can also happen when a river or stream overflows its bank, when a levee is breached, or when a dam breaks. Flash floods, which can develop quickly, often have a dangerous wall of roaring water.  The wall carries rocks, mud, and rubble and can sweep away most things in its path. Be aware of flood hazards no matter where you live, but especially if you live in a low-lying area, near water or downstream from a dam.  Although there are no guarantees of safety during a flood, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Federal Emergency Management Agency

A hurricane is a severe type of tropical storm. Hurricanes produce high winds, heavy rains and thunderstorms.   Hurricanes can cause tremendous damage. Winds can exceed 155 miles per hour. Hurricanes and tropical storms can also spawn tornadoes and lead to flooding . The high winds and heavy rains can destroy buildings, roads and bridges, and knock down power lines and trees. In coastal areas, very high tides called storm surges cause extensive damage. Although there are no guarantees of safety during a hurricane, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Federal Emergency Management Agency

Oil spills often happen because of accidents, when people make mistakes or equipment breaks down. Other causes include natural disasters or deliberate acts.  Oil spills have major environmental and economic effects. Oil spills can also affect human health . These effects can depend on what kind of oil was spilled and where (on land, in a river, or in the ocean). Other factors include what kind of exposure and how much exposure there was. People who clean up the spill are more at risk. Problems could include skin and eye irritation, neurologic and breathing problems, and stress. Not much is known about the long-term effects of oil spills.

Radiation is a type of energy. People are exposed to small amounts of radiation every day from sources such as sunlight. A radiation emergency would involve larger amounts of radiation and could be caused by: Dirty bombs - a mix of explosives with radioactive powder Fallout from a nuclear bomb Accidental release from a nuclear reactor or a nuclear weapons plant A lot of radiation over a short period can cause burns or radiation sickness. If the exposure is large enough, it can cause premature aging or even death. Although there are no guarantees of safety during a radiation emergency, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Tornadoes are nature's most violent storms. They are rotating, funnel-shaped clouds that extend from a thunderstorm to the ground. Their whirling winds can reach 300 miles per hour. They can strike quickly with little or no warning, devastate a neighborhood in seconds, and leave a path of damage over a mile wide and 50 miles long.  Tornadoes can also accompany tropical storms and hurricanes as they move onto land. Although there are no guarantees of safety during a tornado, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Federal Emergency Management Agency

A tsunami is a series of huge ocean waves created by an underwater disturbance. Causes include earthquakes , landslides, volcanic eruptions , or meteorites--chunks of rock from space that strike the surface of Earth.   A tsunami can move hundreds of miles per hour in the open ocean. It can smash into land with waves as high as 100 feet or more and cause devastating floods . Drowning is the most common cause of death related to a tsunami. Although there are no guarantees of safety during a tsunami, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Federal Emergency Management Agency

A volcano is a vent in the Earth's crust. Hot rock, steam, poisonous gases, and ash reach the Earth's surface when a volcano erupts.  An eruption can also cause earthquakes , mudflows and flash floods , rock falls and landslides, acid rain, fires , and even tsunamis . Volcanic gas and ash can damage the lungs of small infants, older adults, and people with severe respiratory illnesses.   Volcanic ash can affect people hundreds of miles away from the eruption. Although there are no guarantees of safety during a volcanic eruption, you can take actions to protect yourself.  You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Federal Emergency Management Agency

Wildfires are fires that burn out of control in a natural area, like a forest, grassland, or prairie. They often begin unnoticed. They spread quickly, and can damage natural resources, destroy homes, and threaten the safety of the public and firefighters. Humans cause most wildfires. It can be an accident, like when people don't take care of their campfire properly, burn debris, or are careless when getting rid of their cigarettes. It can also be on purpose, which is called arson. Lightning and lava also can also causes wildfires. Wildfires are more common when conditions are dry. High winds can make them spread more quickly. Although there are no guarantees of safety if you live in an area threatened by a wildfire, you can take actions to protect yourself. You should have a disaster plan . Being prepared can help reduce fear, anxiety, and losses. If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Federal Emergency Management Agency

What kinds of problems can severe winter weather cause? Winter storms can bring extreme cold, freezing rain, snow, ice, and high winds. Staying safe and warm can be a challenge. You may have to cope with problems such as: Cold-related health problems, including frostbite and hypothermia Household fires and carbon monoxide poisoning from space heaters and fireplaces Unsafe driving conditions from icy roads Power failures and loss of communication Floods after the snow and ice melt How can I prepare for a winter weather emergency? If there is a winter storm coming, there are things you can do to try to keep yourself and your loved ones safe: Have a disaster plan which includes Making sure that you have important phone numbers, including for your health care providers, pharmacy, and veterinarian Having a communication plan for your family Knowing how to get reliable information during the storm Prepare your home to keep out the cold with insulation, caulking, and weather stripping. Learn how to keep pipes from freezing. Gather supplies in case you need to stay home for several days without power If you plan to use your fireplace or wood stove for emergency heating, have your chimney or flue inspected each year Install a smoke detector and a battery-operated carbon monoxide detector If you have to travel, be sure you have an emergency car kit with some basic supplies like An ice scraper A shovel Cat litter or sand for better tire traction Water and snacks Extra warm clothing Jumper cables First aid kit with any necessary medicines and a pocket knife A battery-powered radio, a flashlight, and extra batteries Emergency flares or distress flags Waterproof matches and a can to melt snow for water If you do experience a disaster, it is normal to feel stressed. You may need help in finding ways to cope . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

We have all heard it many times before -- regular exercise is good for you, and it can help you manage your weight. But if you are like many Americans, you are busy, you sit most of the day at your job, and you haven't yet changed your exercise habits. The good news is that it's never too late to start. You can start slowly, and find ways to fit more physical activity into your life. To get the most benefit, you should try to get the recommended amount of physical activity for your age. If you can do that, the payoff is that you will feel better, may help prevent or control many diseases, and will likely even live longer. What are the health benefits of exercise? Regular exercise and physical activity may: Help you get to and stay at a healthy weight . Along with diet, exercise plays an important role in maintaining a healthy weight and preventing obesity . If you are at a healthy weight, you can maintain it if the calories you eat and drink are equal to the amount of energy you burn. To lose weight, you need to use more calories than you eat and drink. Reduce your risk of heart diseases. Exercise strengthens your heart and improves your circulation. The increased blood flow raises the oxygen levels in your body. This helps lower your risk of heart diseases such as coronary artery disease and heart attack .  Regular exercise can also lower high blood pressure , cholesterol , and triglyceride levels, all of which are risk factors for heart disease. Help your body manage blood glucose (blood sugar) and insulin levels. Exercise can lower your blood glucose levels and help your insulin work better. This can reduce your risk of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes . And if you already have one of these diseases, exercise can help you to manage it. Help you manage a chronic health condition. For example, regular physical activity may help reduce pain and improve function in adults with arthritis . It can also help support daily living activities for people with disabilities . This may help them to be more independent. Help you quit smoking . Exercise may make it easier to quit smoking by reducing your cravings and withdrawal symptoms. It can also help limit the weight you might gain when you stop smoking. Improve your mental health and mood. During exercise, your body releases chemicals that can improve your mood and make you feel more relaxed. This can help you deal with stress , manage anxiety , and reduce your risk of depression . Help keep your thinking, learning, and judgment skills sharp as you age. Exercise stimulates your body to release proteins and other chemicals that improve the structure and function of your brain. Strengthen your bones and muscles. Regular exercise can help kids and teens build strong bones. Later in life, it can also slow the loss of bone density that comes with age. Doing muscle-strengthening activities can help you increase or maintain your muscle mass and strength. Reduce your risk of some cancers, including colon , breast , uterine , bladder , esophageal , kidney , stomach , and lung cancer. There are different ways that physical activity may lower the risk of these cancers. For example, it can strengthen your immune system and reduce inflammation in your body. It also helps prevent obesity, which is a risk factor for many cancers. Reduce your risk of falls . For older adults, doing balance and muscle-strengthening activities can help reduce your risk of falling. Improve your sleep. Exercise can help you to fall asleep faster and stay asleep longer. Improve your sexual health. Regular exercise may lower the risk of erectile dysfunction (ED) in men. For those who already have ED, exercise may help improve their sexual function. In women, exercise may increase sexual arousal. Increase your chances of living longer. Studies show that physical activity can reduce your risk of dying early from the leading causes of death, like heart disease and certain cancers. How can I make exercise a part of my regular routine? Here are some tips to help you make exercise part of your regular routine: Make everyday activities more active. Even small changes can help. You can take the stairs instead of the elevator. Walk down the hall to a coworker's office instead of sending an email. Wash the car yourself. Park further away from your destination. Be active with friends and family. Having a workout partner may make you more likely to enjoy exercise. You can also plan social activities that involve exercise. You might also consider joining an exercise group or class, such as a dance class, hiking club, or volleyball team. Keep track of your progress. Keeping a log of your activity or using a fitness tracker may help you set goals and stay motivated. Make exercise more fun. Try listening to music or watching TV while you exercise. Also, mix things up a little bit - if you stick with just one type of exercise, you might get bored. Try doing a combination of activities. Find activities that you can do even when the weather is bad. You can walk in a mall, climb stairs, or work out in a gym even if the weather stops you from exercising outside. Remember that some physical activity is better than none. Do what you can! Even 5 minutes of physical activity has real health benefits.

Regular exercise is one of the best things you can do for your health. It has many benefits , including improving your overall health and fitness, and reducing your risk for many chronic diseases. There are many different types of exercise; it is important that you pick the right types for you. Most people benefit from a combination of them: Endurance, or aerobic, activities increase your breathing and heart rate. They keep your heart, lungs, and circulatory system healthy and improve your overall fitness. Examples include brisk walking, jogging, swimming, and biking. Strength, or resistance training, exercises make your muscles stronger. Some examples are lifting weights and using a resistance band. Balance exercises can make it easier to walk on uneven surfaces and help prevent falls. To improve your balance, try tai chi or exercises like standing on one leg. Flexibility exercises stretch your muscles and can help your body stay limber. Yoga and doing various stretches can make you more flexible. Fitting regular exercise into your daily schedule may seem difficult at first. But you can start slowly, and break your exercise time into chunks. Even doing ten minutes at a time is fine. You can work your way up to doing the recommended amount of exercise. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Other things that you can do to make the most of your workouts include: Choosing activities that work all the different parts of the body, including your core (muscles around your back, abdomen, and pelvis). Good core strength improves balance and stability and helps to prevent lower back injury. Choosing activities that you enjoy. It's easier to make exercise a regular part of your life if you have fun doing it. Exercising safely , with proper equipment, to prevent injuries . Also, listen to your body and don't overdo it. Giving yourself goals. The goals should challenge you, but also be realistic. It's also helpful to reward yourself when you reach your goals. The rewards could be something big, like new workout gear, or something smaller, such as movie tickets.

Like adults, kids need exercise. Most children need at least an hour of physical activity every day. Regular exercise has many benefits for children. It can help them: Feel less stressed Feel better about themselves Feel more ready to learn in school Keep a healthy weight Build and keep healthy bones, muscles and joints Sleep better at night As kids spend more time watching TV, they spend less time running and playing. Parents should limit TV, video game and computer time.  Parents can set a good example by being active themselves.  Exercising together can be fun for everyone.  Competitive sports can help kids stay fit. Walking or biking to school, dancing, bowling and yoga are some other ways for kids to get exercise.

Exercise and physical activity are good for just about everyone, including older adults. There are four main types and each type is different. Doing them all will give you more benefits .: Endurance, or aerobic, activities increase your breathing and heart rate. Brisk walking or jogging, dancing, swimming, and biking are examples. Strength exercises make your muscles stronger. Lifting weights or using a resistance band can build strength. Balance exercises help prevent falls Flexibility exercises stretch your muscles and can help your body stay limber If you have not been active, you can start slowly and work up to your goal. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Check with your health care provider on what is right for you. NIH: National Institute on Aging

What is an inactive lifestyle? Being a couch potato. Not exercising. A sedentary or inactive lifestyle. You have probably heard of all of these phrases, and they mean the same thing: a lifestyle with a lot of sitting and lying down, with very little to no exercise. In the United States and around the world, people are spending more and more time doing sedentary activities. During our leisure time, we are often sitting: while using a computer or other device, watching TV, or playing video games. Many of our jobs have become more sedentary, with long days sitting at a desk. And the way most of us get around involves sitting - in cars, on buses, and on trains. How does an inactive lifestyle affect your body? When you have an inactive lifestyle,: You burn fewer calories. This makes you more likely to gain weight. You may lose muscle strength and endurance, because you are not using your muscles as much Your bones may get weaker and lose some mineral content Your metabolism may be affected, and your body may have more trouble breaking down fats and sugars Your immune system may not work as well You may have poorer blood circulation Your body may have more inflammation You may develop a hormonal imbalance What are the health risks of an inactive lifestyle? Having an inactive lifestyle can be one of the causes of many chronic diseases. By not getting regular exercise, you raise your risk of: Obesity Heart diseases , including coronary artery disease and heart attack High blood pressure High cholesterol Stroke Metabolic syndrome Type 2 diabetes Certain cancers, including colon , breast , and uterine cancers Osteoporosis and falls Increased feelings of depression and anxiety Having a sedentary lifestyle can also raise your risk of premature death. And the more sedentary you are, the higher your health risks are. How can I get started with exercise? If you have been inactive, you may need to start slowly. You can keep adding more exercise gradually. The more you can do, the better. But try not to feel overwhelmed, and do what you can. Getting some exercise is always better than getting none. Eventually, your goal can be to get the recommended amount of exercise for your age and health. There are many different ways to get exercise; it is important to find the types that are best for you . You can also try to add activity to your life in smaller ways, such as at home and at work. How can I be more active around the house? There are some ways you can be active around your house: Housework, gardening, and yard work are all physical work. To increase the intensity, you could try doing them at a more vigorous pace. Keep moving while you watch TV. Lift hand weights, do some gentle yoga stretches, or pedal an exercise bike. Instead of using the TV remote, get up and change the channels yourself. Work out at home with a workout video (on your TV or on the internet) Go for a walk in your neighborhood. It can be more fun if you walk your dog, walk your kids to school, or walk with a friend. Stand up when talking on the phone Get some exercise equipment for your home. Treadmills and elliptical trainers are great, but not everyone has the money or space for one. Less expensive equipment such as yoga balls, exercise mats, stretch bands, and hand weights can help you get a workout at home too. How can I be more active at work? Most of us sit when we are working, often in front of a computer. In fact, less than 20% of Americans have physically active jobs. It can be challenging to fit physical activity into your busy workday, but here are some tips to help you get moving: Get up from your chair and move around at least once an hour Stand when you are talking on the phone Find out whether your company can get you a stand-up or treadmill desk Take the stairs instead of the elevator Use your break or part of your lunch hour to walk around the building Stand up and walk to a colleague's office instead of sending an email Have "walking" or standing meetings with co-workers instead of sitting in a conference room

Regular exercise is one of the best things you can do for your health. It has many benefits . It can improve your overall health and fitness and reduce your risk for many chronic diseases.To get the most benefit, here's how much physical activity you should get: For adults: Get at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity each week. Or you could do a combination of the two. : Try to spread your physical activity out over several days of the week. That's better than trying to do it all in one or two days. Some days you may not have long blocks of time to do physical activity. You can try splitting it up into segments of ten minutes or more. Aerobic activities include walking fast, jogging, swimming, and biking Moderate intensity means that while you are doing that activity, you should be able to say a few words in a row but not sing Vigorous intensity means that while you are doing that activity, you won't be able to say more than a few words without stopping for a breath Also, do strengthening activities twice per week. : Strengthening activities include lifting weights, working with exercise bands, and doing sit-ups and pushups Choose activities that work all the different parts of the body - your legs, hips, back, chest, stomach, shoulders, and arms. You should repeat exercises for each muscle group 8 to 12 times per session. For preschool-aged children (ages 3-5): Preschool children should be physically active throughout the day, to help with their growth and development. They should get both structured and unstructured active play. Structured play has a goal and is directed by an adult. Examples include playing a sport or a game. Unstructured play is creative free play, such as playing on a playground. For children and teens: Get 60 minutes or more of physical activity every day. Most of it should be moderate-intensity aerobic activity. : Activities should vary and be a good fit for the child's age and physical development Moderate-intensity aerobic activities include walking, running, skipping, playing on the playground, playing basketball, and biking Also, try to get each of these at least 3 days a week: vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, muscle-strengthening activity, and bone-strengthening activity. : Vigorous-intensity aerobic activities include running, doing jumping jacks, and fast swimming Muscle-strengthening activities include playing on playground equipment, playing tug-of-war, and doing pushups and pull-ups Bone-strengthening activities include hopping, skipping, doing jumping jacks, playing volleyball, and working with resistance bands For older adults, pregnant women, and people with chronic health problems: Older adults , pregnant women, and people who have special health needs should check with their health care provider on how much physical activity they should get and what types of activities they should do. Exercise tips: People who are trying to lose weight may need to get more physical activity. They also need to adjust their diet, so they are burning more calories than they eat and drink. If you have been inactive, you may need to start slowly. You can keep adding more gradually. The more you can do, the better. But try not to feel overwhelmed, and do what you can. Getting some physical activity is always better than getting none. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Sports can be a great way to get in shape or stay that way. Having a specific goal can be a great motivator.  Physically, you need strength and endurance. Your training will vary with your sport. You would not train the same way for pole vaulting as for swimming. You might, however, cross train. Cross training simply means that you include a variety of fitness activities in your program. Research shows that cross training builds stronger bones. Remember to listen to your body. If you frequently feel exhausted or you are in pain, you may be overdoing it. Injuries can be the result. And be sure that you use your body and your equipment safely .  What you eat and drink is also important. Water is the most important nutrient for active people. Drink it before, during and after workouts.

Exercising is good for you, but sometimes you can injure yourself when you play sports or exercise. Accidents, poor training practices, or improper gear can cause them. Some people get hurt because they are not in shape. Not warming up or stretching enough can also lead to injuries. The most common sports injuries are: Sprains and strains Knee injuries Swollen muscles Achilles tendon injuries Pain along the shin bone Rotator cuff injuries Fractures (broken bones) Dislocations If you get hurt, stop playing. Continuing to play or exercise can cause more harm.  Treatment often begins with the RICE (Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation) method to relieve pain, reduce swelling, and speed healing. Other possible treatments include pain relievers, keeping the injured area from moving, rehabilitation, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Playing sports can be fun, but it can also be dangerous if you are not careful. You can help prevent injuries by: Getting a physical to make sure you are healthy before you start playing your sport Wearing the right shoes, gear, and equipment Drinking lots of water Warming up and stretching If you have already hurt yourself playing a sport, make sure you recover completely before you start up again.  If possible, protect the injured part of your body with padding, a brace, or special equipment. When you do start playing again, start slowly.

Many Americans drink alcohol at least occasionally. The Dietary Guidelines for Americans say that adults of legal drinking age should either not drink or drink in moderation. Drinking less is better for your health than drinking more. Also, there are some people who should not drink at all. If you are going to drink, it's important to know how alcohol affects you and how much is too much. How does alcohol affect the body? Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant. This means that it is a drug that slows down brain activity. It can change your mood, behavior, and self-control. It can cause problems with memory and thinking clearly. Alcohol can also affect your coordination and physical control. Alcohol also has effects on the other organs in your body. For example, it can raise your blood pressure and heart rate. If you drink too much at once, it could make you throw up. Why are the effects of alcohol different from person to person? Alcohol's effects vary from person to person, depending on a variety of factors, including: How much you drink How often you drink Your age Your sex Your genetics Your overall health Whether or not you have a family history of alcohol problems What is moderate drinking? For most women, moderate drinking is no more than 1 standard drink a day For most men, moderate drinking is no more than 2 standard drinks a day Even though moderate drinking may be safe for many people, there are still risks. Moderate drinking can raise the risk of death from certain cancers and heart diseases. What is a standard drink? In the United States, a standard drink is one that contains about 14 grams of pure alcohol, which is found in: 12 ounces of regular beer (5% alcohol content) 5 ounces of wine (12% alcohol content) 1.5 ounces or a "shot" of distilled spirits or liquor (40% alcohol content) Who should not drink alcohol? Some people should not drink alcohol at all, including those who: Are in recovery from an alcohol use disorder (AUD) Are are unable to control the amount they drink Are under age 21 Are pregnant or trying to become pregnant Are taking medicines that can interact with alcohol Have medical conditions that get can worse if you drink alcohol Are planning on driving Will be operating machinery or doing activities that require skill, coordination, and alertness If you have questions about whether it is safe for you to drink, talk with your health care provider. What is excessive drinking? Excessive drinking includes binge drinking and heavy alcohol use: Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more: For men, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For women, it is usually after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Heavy alcohol use means: For men, having more than 5 drinks on any day or more than 15 drinks per week. For women, having more than 4 drinks on any day or more than 8 drinks per week. Binge drinking raises your risk of injuries, car crashes, and alcohol overdose. It also puts you at risk of becoming violent or being the victim of violence. Heavy alcohol use over a long period of time may cause health problems such as: Alcohol use disorder (AUD) Liver diseases , including cirrhosis and fatty liver disease Heart diseases Increased risk of certain cancers Increased risk of injuries Heavy alcohol use can also cause problems at home, at work, and with friends. But treatment can help. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

Antioxidants are man-made or natural substances that may prevent or delay some types of cell damage. Antioxidants are found in many foods, including fruits and vegetables. They are also available as dietary supplements. Examples of antioxidants include: Beta-carotene Lutein Lycopene Selenium Vitamin A Vitamin C Vitamin E Vegetables and fruits are rich sources of antioxidants. There is good evidence that eating a diet with lots of vegetables and fruits is healthy and lowers risks of certain diseases. But it isn't clear whether this is because of the antioxidants, something else in the foods, or other factors. High-dose supplements of antioxidants may be linked to health risks in some cases. For example, high doses of beta-carotene may increase the risk of lung cancer in smokers. High doses of vitamin E may increase risks of prostate cancer and one type of stroke. Antioxidant supplements may also interact with some medicines. To minimize risk, tell your health care providers about any antioxidants you use. NIH: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

Do you know if your current weight is healthy?  "Underweight", "normal", "overweight", and " obese " are all labels for ranges of weight. Obese and overweight mean that your weight is greater than it should be for your health. Underweight means that it is lower than it should be for your health. Your healthy body weight depends on your sex and height. For children, it also depends on your age. A sudden, unexpected change in weight can be a sign of a medical problem.  Causes for sudden weight loss can include: Thyroid problems Cancer Infectious diseases Digestive diseases Certain medicines Sudden weight gain can be due to medicines, thyroid problems, heart failure, and kidney disease. Good nutrition and exercise can help in losing weight . Eating extra calories within a well-balanced diet and treating any underlying medical problems can help to add weight.

Breastfeeding offers many benefits to your baby. Breast milk contains the right balance of nutrients to help your infant grow into a strong and healthy toddler. Some of the nutrients in breast milk also help protect your infant against some common childhood illnesses and infections. It may also help your health. Certain types of cancer may occur less often in mothers who have breastfed their babies. Women who don't have health problems should try to give their babies breast milk for at least the first six months of life. Most women with health problems can breastfeed. There are rare exceptions when women are advised not to breastfeed because they have certain illnesses.  Some medicines, illegal drugs, and alcohol can also pass through the breast milk and cause harm to your baby. Check with your health care provider if you have concerns about whether you should breastfeed. If you are having problems with breastfeeding, contact a lactation consultant. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

The B vitamins are: B1 (thiamine) B2 (riboflavin) B3 (niacin) B5 (pantothenic acid) B6 B7 (biotin) B12 Folic acid These vitamins help the process your body uses to get or make energy from the food you eat. They also help form red blood cells.  You can get B vitamins from proteins such as fish, poultry, meat, eggs, and dairy products.  Leafy green vegetables, beans, and peas also have B vitamins.  Many cereals and some breads have added B vitamins. Not getting enough of certain B vitamins can cause diseases.  A lack of B12 or B6 can cause anemia .

What is caffeine? Caffeine is a bitter substance that occurs naturally in more than 60 plants including: Coffee beans Tea leaves Kola nuts, which are used to flavor soft drink colas Cacao pods, which are used to make chocolate products There is also synthetic (man-made) caffeine, which is added to some medicines, foods, and drinks. For example, some pain relievers, cold medicines, and over-the-counter medicines for alertness contain synthetic caffeine. So do energy drinks and "energy-boosting" gums and snacks. Most people consume caffeine from drinks. The amount of caffeine in different drinks can vary a lot, but it is generally: An 8-ounce cup of coffee: 95-200 mg A 12-ounce can of cola: 35-45 mg An 8-ounce energy drink: 70-100 mg An 8-ounce cup of tea: 14-60 mg What are caffeine's effects on the body? Caffeine has many effects on your body's metabolism. It: Stimulates your central nervous system, which can make you feel more awake and give you a boost of energy Is a diuretic, meaning that it helps your body get rid of extra salt and water by urinating more Increases the release of acid in your stomach, sometimes leading to an upset stomach or heartburn May interfere with the absorption of calcium in the body Increases your blood pressure Within one hour of eating or drinking caffeine, it reaches its peak level in your blood. You may continue to feel the effects of caffeine for four to six hours. What are the side effects from too much caffeine? For most people, it is not harmful to consume up to 400mg of caffeine a day. If you do eat or drink too much caffeine, it can cause health problems, such as: Restlessness and shakiness Insomnia Headaches Dizziness Fast heart rate Dehydration Anxiety Dependency, so you need to take more of it to get the same results Some people are more sensitive to the effects of caffeine than others. What are energy drinks, and why can they be a problem? Energy drinks are beverages that have added caffeine. The amount of caffeine in energy drinks can vary widely, and sometimes the labels on the drinks do not give you the actual amount of caffeine in them. Energy drinks may also contain sugars, vitamins, herbs, and supplements. Companies that make energy drinks claim that the drinks can increase alertness and improve physical and mental performance. This has helped make the drinks popular with American teens and young adults. There's limited data showing that energy drinks might temporarily improve alertness and physical endurance. There is not enough evidence to show that they enhance strength or power. But what we do know is that energy drinks can be dangerous because they have large amounts of caffeine. And since they have lots of sugar, they can contribute to weight gain and worsen diabetes. Sometimes young people mix their energy drinks with alcohol. It is dangerous to combine alcohol and caffeine. Caffeine can interfere with your ability to recognize how drunk you are, which can lead you to drink more. This also makes you more likely to make bad decisions. Who should avoid or limit caffeine? You should check with your health care provider about whether you should limit or avoid caffeine if you: Are pregnant , since caffeine passes through the placenta to your baby. Are breastfeeding , since a small amount of caffeine that you consume is passed along to your baby. Have sleep disorders , including insomnia. Have migraines or other chronic headaches. Have anxiety. Have GERD or ulcers . Have arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat). Have high blood pressure . Take certain medicines or supplements, including stimulants, certain antibiotics , asthma medicines, and heart medicines. Check with your health care provider about whether there might be interactions between caffeine and any medicines and supplements that you take. Are a child or teen. Neither should have as much caffeine as adults. Children can be especially sensitive to the effects of caffeine. What is caffeine withdrawal? If you have been consuming caffeine on a regular basis and then suddenly stop, you may have caffeine withdrawal. Symptoms can include: Headaches Drowsiness Irritability Nausea Trouble concentrating These symptoms usually go away after a couple of days.

What is calcium and why do I need it? Calcium is a mineral , a nutrient that you need (in small amounts) to keep your body healthy. You have more calcium in your body than any other mineral. Calcium has many important jobs: To build and maintain strong bones. Your body stores almost all of its calcium in your bones and teeth to keep them strong. To help your muscles move. To help your nerves to carry messages between your brain and the rest of your body. To help your blood vessels move blood throughout your body. To help release hormones that affect many functions in your body. Not getting enough calcium can cause several conditions, including: Osteoporosis , a disease which can make your bones weaker and more likely to break. Rickets , a disease in children that causes soft, weak bones. Osteomalacia, a condition which causes soft bones in children and adults. How do I get calcium? You can get calcium from foods and supplements. You may be able to get enough calcium by eating a variety of foods, including: Dairy products such as milk, cheese, and yogurt. These are the main food sources of calcium for most people in the United States. Leafy, green vegetables such as kale, broccoli, and Chinese cabbage (bok choi). Fish with soft bones that you can eat, such as canned sardines and salmon. Calcium-enriched foods such as breakfast cereals, fruit juices, soy and rice drinks, and tofu. The product labels for these foods will show how much calcium they have. Calcium is available in supplements. It is also included in many multivitamins. The two main forms of calcium supplements are calcium carbonate and calcium citrate: Calcium carbonate is absorbed best when taken with food. Some over-the-counter antacids, such as Tums and Rolaids, also contain calcium carbonate. Calcium citrate is absorbed well on an empty stomach or a full stomach. People with low levels of stomach acid absorb calcium citrate more easily than calcium carbonate. Calcium is absorbed best when you take 500 mg or less at one time. If you are taking more than that amount each day, take a smaller dose twice a day rather than taking it all at once. Calcium supplements might cause gas , bloating, and constipation in some people. If you have any of these symptoms, you could try: Spreading out the calcium dose throughout the day Taking it with meals Switching the form of calcium you take How much calcium do I need? The amount of calcium you need each day depends on your age and other factors.  The recommended amounts, in milligrams (mg), are: Birth to 6 months: 200 mg Infants 7-12 months: 260 mg Children 1-3 years: 700 mg Children 4-8 years: 1,000 mg Children 9-13 years: 1,300 mg Teens 14-18 years: 1,300 mg Adults 19-50 years: 1,000 mg Adult men 51-70 years: 1,000 mg Adult women 51-70 years: 1,200 mg Adults 71 years and older: 1,200 mg Pregnant and breastfeeding teens: 1,300 mg Pregnant and breastfeeding adults: 1,000 mg Certain people may have trouble getting enough calcium, including: Children and teens age 4 to 18 years People who are Black or Asian Adults age 50 years and older living in poverty Postmenopausal women; your body absorbs and retains less calcium after menopause People who don't drink milk or eat other dairy products Check with your health care provider to see if you need to take calcium supplements, and if so, how much you should take. Your provider may want to first do a calcium blood test to see if you are getting enough of it. NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

What are carbohydrates? Carbohydrates, or carbs, are sugar molecules. Along with proteins and fats , carbohydrates are one of three main nutrients found in foods and drinks. Your body breaks down carbohydrates into glucose. Glucose, or blood sugar , is the main source of energy for your body's cells, tissues, and organs. Glucose can be used immediately or stored in the liver and muscles for later use. What are the different types of carbohydrates? There are three main types of carbohydrates: Sugars. They are also called simple carbohydrates because they are in the most basic form. They can be added to foods, such as the sugar in candy, desserts, processed foods, and regular soda. They also include the kinds of sugar that are found naturally in fruits, vegetables, and milk. Starches. They are complex carbohydrates, which are made of lots of simple sugars strung together. Your body needs to break starches down into sugars to use them for energy. Starches include bread, cereal, and pasta. They also include certain vegetables, like potatoes, peas, and corn. Fiber . It is also a complex carbohydrate. Your body cannot break down most fibers, so eating foods with fiber can help you feel full and make you less likely to overeat. Diets high in fiber have other health benefits. They may help prevent stomach or intestinal problems, such as constipation . They may also help lower cholesterol and blood sugar. Fiber is found in many foods that come from plants, including fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, beans, and whole grains. Which foods have carbohydrates? Common foods with carbohydrates include: Grains, such as bread, noodles, pasta, crackers, cereals, and rice Fruits, such as apples, bananas, berries, mangoes, melons, and oranges Dairy products, such as milk and yogurt Legumes, including dried beans, lentils, and peas Snack foods and sweets, such as cakes, cookies, candy, and other desserts Juices, regular sodas, fruit drinks, sports drinks, and energy drinks that contain sugar Starchy vegetables, such as potatoes, corn, and peas Some foods don't have a lot of carbohydrates, such as meat, fish, poultry, some types of cheese, nuts, and oils. Which types of carbohydrates should I eat? You do need to eat some carbohydrates to give your body energy. But it's important to eat the right kinds of carbohydrates for your health: When eating grains, choose mostly whole grains and not refined grains: Whole grains are foods like whole-wheat bread, brown rice, whole cornmeal, and oatmeal. They offer lots of nutrients that your body needs, like vitamins , minerals , and fiber. To figure out whether a product has a lot of whole grain, check the ingredients list on the package and see if a whole grain is one of the first few items listed. Refined grains are foods that have had some parts of the grains removed. This also removes some of the nutrients that are good for your health. Eat foods with lots of fiber. The Nutrition Facts labels on the back of food packages tells you how much fiber a product has. Try to avoid foods that have a lot of added sugar. These foods can have many calories but not much nutrition. Eating too much added sugar raises your blood sugar and can make you gain weight. You can tell if a food or drink has added sugars by looking at the Nutrition Facts label on the back of the food package. It tells you how much total sugar and added sugar is in that food or drink. How many carbohydrates should I eat? There is no one-size-fits-all amount of carbohydrates that people should eat. This amount can vary, depending on factors such as your age, sex, health, and whether or not you are trying to lose or gain weight. On average, people should get 45 to 65% of their calories from carbohydrates every day. On the Nutrition Facts labels, the Daily Value for total carbohydrates is 275 g per day. This is based on a 2,000-calorie daily diet. Your Daily Value may be higher or lower depending on your calorie needs and health. Is it safe to eat a low-carb diet? Some people go on a low-carb diet to try to lose weight. This usually means eating between 25 g and 150 g of carbs each day. This kind of diet can be safe, but you should talk to your health care provider before starting it. One problem with low-carb diets is that they can limit the amount of fiber you get each day. They can also be hard to stay on for the long term.

A healthy diet helps children grow and learn. It also helps prevent obesity and weight-related diseases, such as diabetes. To give your child a nutritious diet: Make half of what is on your child's plate fruits and vegetables Choose healthy sources of protein, such as lean meat, nuts, and eggs Serve whole-grain breads and cereals because they are high in fiber. Reduce refined grains. Broil, grill, or steam foods instead of frying them Limit fast food and junk food Offer water or milk instead of sugary fruit drinks and sodas Learn about your children's nutrient requirements. Some of them, such as the requirements for iron and calcium, change as your child ages. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that's found in all the cells in your body. Your body needs some cholesterol to make hormones , vitamin D , and substances that help you digest foods. Your body makes all the cholesterol it needs. Cholesterol is also found in foods from animal sources, such as egg yolks, meat, and cheese. If you have too much cholesterol in your blood, it can combine with other substances in the blood to form plaque. Plaque sticks to the walls of your arteries. This buildup of plaque is known as atherosclerosis . It can lead to coronary artery disease , a condition in which your coronary arteries become narrow or even blocked. What are HDL, LDL, and VLDL? HDL, LDL, and VLDL are lipoproteins. They are a combination of fat (lipid) and protein. The lipids need to be attached to the proteins so they can move through the blood. Different types of lipoproteins have different purposes: HDL stands for high-density lipoprotein. It is sometimes called "good" cholesterol because it helps your body get rid of cholesterol.  It carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Your liver then removes the cholesterol from your body. LDL stands for low-density lipoprotein. It is sometimes called "bad" cholesterol because a high LDL level leads to the buildup of plaque in your arteries. VLDL stands for very low-density lipoprotein. Some people also call VLDL a "bad" cholesterol because it too contributes to the buildup of plaque in your arteries. But VLDL and LDL are different; VLDL mainly carries triglycerides and LDL mainly carries cholesterol. What causes high cholesterol? The most common cause of high cholesterol is an unhealthy lifestyle. This can include: Unhealthy eating habits, such as eating lots of saturated fats . These fats are found in red meats, full-fat dairy products, chocolate, some baked goods, and many deep-fried and processed foods.  Eating too much saturated fat can raise your LDL (bad) cholesterol. Lack of physical activity , with lots of sitting and little exercise. This lowers your HDL (good) cholesterol. Smoking , which lowers HDL cholesterol, especially in women. It also raises your LDL cholesterol. Stress , which may raise levels of certain hormones such as corticosteroids. These can cause your body to make more cholesterol. Drinking too much alcohol , which can raise your total cholesterol level. Genetics may also cause people to have high cholesterol. For example, familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited condition that causes very high levels of cholesterol in the blood. Other medical conditions and certain medicines may also raise LDL cholesterol levels or lower HDL cholesterol levels. What can raise my risk of high cholesterol? A variety of things can raise your risk of high cholesterol: Age. Your cholesterol levels tend to rise as you get older. Even though it is less common, younger people, including children and teens , can also have high cholesterol. Sex. Between ages 20 and 39, men have a greater risk of high total cholesterol than women. But after menopause , a woman's risk goes up. This happens because menopause lowers levels of female hormones that may protect against high blood cholesterol. Family history. High blood cholesterol can run in families. Other health conditions. Conditions such as diabetes , chronic kidney disease , HIV , and lupus can raise your risk of high cholesterol. Medicines. Certain medicines can raise your level of LDL cholesterol or lower your level of HDL cholesterol, including: Steroids Some chemotherapy medicines Medicines taken after an organ transplant Medicines for certain heart conditions Certain acne medicines Race or ethnicity. People from certain racial or ethnic groups may have an increased risk of high cholesterol. For example, Asian Americans are more likely to have high levels of LDL cholesterol than other groups. And non-Hispanic White people are more likely than other groups to have high levels of total cholesterol. Weight. Being overweight or having obesity raises your cholesterol level. What other health problems can high cholesterol cause? Undiagnosed or untreated high blood cholesterol can lead to serious health problems: If you have large deposits of plaque in your arteries, an area of plaque can rupture (break open). This can cause a blood clot to form on the surface of the plaque. If the clot becomes large enough, it can mostly or completely block blood flow in a coronary artery. If the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your heart muscle is reduced or blocked, it can cause angina (chest pain) or a heart attack . Plaque also can build up in other arteries in your body, including the arteries that bring oxygen-rich blood to your brain and limbs. This can lead to problems such as carotid artery disease , stroke , and peripheral arterial disease . How is high cholesterol diagnosed? There are usually no signs or symptoms that you have high cholesterol. A blood test can measure your cholesterol levels . When and how often you should get this test depends on your age, risk factors, and family history.  The general recommendations are: For people who are age 19 or younger: : The first test should be between ages 9 to 11 Children should have the test again every 5 years Some children may have this test starting at age 2 if there is a family history of high blood cholesterol, heart attack, or stroke For people who are ages 20 to 65: : Younger adults should have the test every 5 years Men ages 45 to 65 and women ages 55 to 65 should have it every 1 to 2 years For people over age 65: They should be tested every year How can I lower my cholesterol? You can lower your cholesterol through heart-healthy lifestyle changes. They include a heart-healthy eating plan , weight management , and regular physical activity . If the lifestyle changes alone do not lower your cholesterol enough, you may also need to take medicines. There are several types of cholesterol-lowering medicines available, including statins . If you take medicines to lower your cholesterol, you still should continue with the lifestyle changes. Some people with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) may receive a treatment called lipoprotein apheresis. This treatment uses a filtering machine to remove LDL cholesterol from the blood. Then the machine returns the rest of the blood back to the person. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that that's found in all the cells in your body. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly.  But if you have too much of it in your blood, it can stick to the walls of your arteries and narrow or even block them. This puts you at risk of coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . How do you measure cholesterol levels? A blood test called a lipoprotein or lipid panel can measure your cholesterol levels. Before the test, you'll need to fast (not eat or drink anything but water) for 9 to 12 hours. The test gives information about your: Total cholesterol . This is a measure of the total amount of cholesterol in your blood. It includes both low-density lipoprotein ( LDL ) cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein ( HDL ) cholesterol. LDL cholesterol. LDL is often called "bad" cholesterol because it is the main source of cholesterol buildup and blockage in the arteries. HDL cholesterol. HDL is often called "good" cholesterol because it helps remove cholesterol from your arteries. Non-HDL. This number is your total cholesterol minus your HDL. Your non-HDL includes LDL and other types of cholesterol such as VLDL (very-low-density lipoprotein). Triglycerides . This is another type of fat in your blood that can raise the risk of heart disease, especially in women . What do my cholesterol numbers mean? Cholesterol numbers are measured in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL). Talk with your healthcare provider about what your cholesterol numbers should be. The numbers that are best for you may depend on your age, race, blood pressure, weight, family history, and more. However, here are some general guidelines showing the desirable levels (levels that are healthy for most people): Anyone age 19 or younger: Type of Cholesterol Healthy Level Total Cholesterol Less than 170 mg/dL Non-HDL Less than 120 mg/dL LDL Less than 110 mg/dL HDL More than 45 mg/dL Men age 20 or older: Type of Cholesterol Healthy Level Total Cholesterol Less than 200 mg/dL Non-HDL Less than 130 mg/dL LDL Less than 100 mg/dL HDL Greater than or equal to 60 mg/dL is best. Levels less than 40 mg/dL are considered low. Women age 20 or older: Type of Cholesterol Healthy Level Total Cholesterol Less than 200 mg/dL Non-HDL Less than 130 mg/dL LDL Less than 100 mg/dL HDL Greater than or equal to 60 mg/dL is best. Levels less than 50 mg/dL are considered low. Triglycerides are not a type of cholesterol, but they are also measured in this test. A normal triglyceride level is below 150 mg/dL. You might need treatment if you have triglyceride levels that are borderline high (150-199 mg/dL) or high (200 mg/dL or more). How often should I get a cholesterol test? When and how often you should get a cholesterol test depends on your age, risk factors, and family history. The general recommendations are: For people who are age 19 or younger : The first test should be between ages 9 to 11 Children should have the test again every 5 years Some children may have this test starting at age 2 if there is a family history of high cholesterol, heart attack, or stroke For people who are ages 20 to 65 : Younger adults should have the test every 5 years Men ages 45 to 65 and women ages 55 to 65 should have it every 1 to 2 years For people older than 65: : They should be tested every year What affects my cholesterol levels? Many factors can affect your cholesterol levels. Some of them are things you can change: Diet. Saturated fat and cholesterol in the food you eat make your blood cholesterol level rise. Saturated fat is the main problem, but cholesterol in foods also matters. Reducing the amount of saturated fat in your diet helps lower your blood cholesterol level. Foods that have high levels of saturated fats include red meats, full-fat dairy products, chocolate, some baked goods, and deep-fried and processed foods. Weight. Being overweight or having obesity are risk factors for heart disease. They also tend to increase your cholesterol Lack of physical activity . Not being physically active is a risk factor for heart disease. Smoking . Cigarette smoking lowers your HDL cholesterol. Since HDL helps to remove cholesterol from your arteries, having a lower HDL level can contribute to a higher cholesterol level. Some factors that you cannot change can also affect cholesterol levels, such as: Age. Your cholesterol levels tend to rise as you get older. Even though it is less common, younger people, including children and teens , can also have high cholesterol. Sex. Between ages 20 and 39, men have a greater risk of high total cholesterol than women. But after menopause , a woman's risk goes up. This happens because menopause lowers levels of female hormones that may protect against high blood cholesterol. Family history. Your genes partly determine how much cholesterol your body makes. High cholesterol can run in families. Race or ethnicity. People from certain racial or ethnic groups may have an increased risk of high cholesterol. For example, Asian Americans are more likely to have high levels of LDL cholesterol than other groups. And non-Hispanic White people are more likely than other groups to have high levels of total cholesterol. How can I lower my cholesterol? You can lower your cholesterol through heart-healthy lifestyle changes. They include a heart-healthy eating plan , weight management , and regular physical activity . If the lifestyle changes alone do not lower your cholesterol enough, you may also need to take medicines. There are several types of cholesterol-lowering medicines available, including statins . If you take medicines to lower your cholesterol, you still should continue with the lifestyle changes. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that that's found in all the cells in your body. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly.  But if you have too much of it in your blood, it can stick to the walls of your arteries and narrow or even block them. This puts you at risk for coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . Cholesterol is made by your liver. It travels through the blood on proteins called lipoproteins. One type of lipoprotein, LDL , is sometimes called the "bad" cholesterol. A high LDL level leads to a buildup of cholesterol in your arteries. Another type, HDL , is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol. It carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Then your liver removes the cholesterol from your body. What are the treatments for high cholesterol? If you have high cholesterol, lifestyle changes can help you lower your cholesterol levels . But sometimes the lifestyle changes are not enough, and you need to take cholesterol medicines. But you should still continue with the lifestyle changes even though you are taking medicines. Who needs cholesterol medicines? Your health care provider may prescribe cholesterol medicines for you if: You have already had a heart attack or stroke , or you have peripheral arterial disease Your LDL (bad) cholesterol level is 190 mg/dL or higher You are 40-75 years old, you have diabetes, and your LDL cholesterol level is 70 mg/dL or higher You are 40-75 years old, you have a high risk of developing heart disease or stroke, and your LDL cholesterol level is 70 mg/dL or higher What are the different types of cholesterol medicines? There are several types of cholesterol-lowering drugs available, including: Statins . They reduce the amount of cholesterol made in the liver. They also increase your liver's ability to remove LDL cholesterol that is already in the blood. Statins are the most common medicines used to treat high cholesterol. Bile acid sequestrants. They keep bile acids, which digest fats and oils, from being absorbed into the body.  But your body needs bile acids, so your liver will make more of them. It makes them by breaking down LDL cholesterol, so this helps lower your LDL cholesterol. Your provider may prescribe these medicines if you cannot take statins or if statins alone are not lowering your cholesterol enough. Cholesterol absorption inhibitors. They block how cholesterol is absorbed into the body. They are also used if you cannot take statins or if statins alone are not lowering your cholesterol enough. Nicotinic acid (niacin). It is a type of B vitamin . It reduces the amount of fats made by your liver, so it lowers your LDL cholesterol and triglycerides. Niacin also raises HDL cholesterol. Even though you can buy niacin without a prescription, you should talk to your provider before taking it to lower your cholesterol. High doses of niacin can cause serious side effects . PCSK9 inhibitors. These are medicines that you inject under your skin. They block a protein called PCSK9. This helps your liver remove and clear LDL cholesterol from your blood. Your provider may prescribe a PCSK9 inhibitor and a statin if you are at high risk of complications like heart attack or stroke, or if you have familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). FH is an inherited disorder that causes very high levels of cholesterol in the blood. Fibrates. They lower triglycerides in several complex ways, including reducing the amount of triglycerides made by the liver. They may also help increase HDL cholesterol and may lower LDL levels a bit. If you take them with statins, it might increase the risk of side effects. Combination medicines. They include more than one type of cholesterol-lowering medicine. There are also combination medicines that can treat both high blood pressure and cholesterol. There are also a few other cholesterol medicines (lomitapide and mipomersen) that are only for people who have FH. How does my health care provider decide which cholesterol medicine I should take? When deciding which medicine you should take and which dose you need, your provider will consider: Your cholesterol levels. Your risk for heart disease and stroke. Your age. Any other health problems you have. Possible side effects of the medicines. Higher doses are more likely to cause side effects, especially over time. Medicines can help control your cholesterol, but they don't cure it. You need to keep taking your medicines and get regular cholesterol checks to make sure that your cholesterol levels are in a healthy range.

DASH stands for Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension. It is an eating plan that is based on research studies sponsored by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI). These studies showed that DASH lowers high blood pressure and improves levels of cholesterol . This reduces your risk of getting heart disease . The DASH eating plan: Emphasizes vegetables, fruits, and whole-grains Includes fat-free or low-fat dairy products, fish, poultry, beans, nuts, and vegetable oils Limits foods that are high in saturated fat. These foods include fatty meats, full-fat dairy products, and tropical oils such as coconut, palm kernel, and palm oils. Limits sugar-sweetened beverages and sweets Along with DASH, other lifestyle changes can help lower your blood pressure . They include staying at a healthy weight, exercising, and not smoking. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is diabetes? If you have diabetes , your blood glucose , or blood sugar, levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood glucose levels. Prediabetes means that your blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes. If you have prediabetes, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes. How do the foods I eat affect my blood glucose levels? The glucose in your blood comes from certain foods called carbohydrates , or "carbs." Foods that are high in carbs include candy and sweets, sodas, breads, tortillas, and white rice. The more carbs you eat, the higher your blood glucose level will be. Whether you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes, making the right food choices is an important way to keep your blood glucose at a level that is healthy for you. When you control your blood glucose, you lower your chance of having serious health problems from diabetes , such as vision loss and heart problems . And if you have prediabetes or are at risk for diabetes, eating foods that keep your blood glucose levels healthy may help prevent type 2 diabetes later on. What's the best diet for diabetes? There isn't a specific diet or meal plan that works for everybody. Your health care provider may have you see a registered dietician (RD) or a diabetes educator who can help design the best eating plan for you. The plan will consider: Any medicines that you take Your weight Any other health conditions you have Your lifestyle and tastes Your goals All eating plans for diabetes have a few things in common, including eating the right foods in the right amounts at the right times . What foods should I eat if I have diabetes? Eating the right foods for diabetes means eating a variety of healthy foods from all the food groups: Fruits and vegetables Whole grains, such as whole wheat, brown rice, barley, quinoa, and oats Proteins , such as lean meats, chicken, turkey, fish, eggs, nuts, beans, lentils, and tofu Nonfat or low-fat dairy, such as milk, yogurt, and cheese What foods should I limit to control my blood glucose? To keep your blood glucose under control, you may need to cut back on certain foods and drinks. This doesn't mean that you can never enjoy them. But you will need to have them less often or in smaller amounts. High-carb foods and drinks, such as: Sugary foods, such as candy, cookies, cake, ice cream, sweetened cereals, and canned fruits with added sugar Drinks with added sugars, such as juice, regular soda, and regular sports or energy drinks White rice, tortillas, breads and pasta - especially those made with white flour Starchy vegetables, such as white potatoes, corn, and peas Fried foods and other foods high in saturated trans fats . Foods high in sodium (salt). Alcohol. If you do drink, you should drink moderately. This means no more than one standard drink a day if you're a woman or two standard drinks a day if you're a man. What else do I need to know about diabetic diets? If you have diabetes, it's important to eat the right amount of food every day. Your eating plan will include how much to eat, so that you get the right amount of carbs in each meal or snack. You'll learn how to count carbs and measure your food. Eating at the right times is also important. You will want to plan for regular, balanced meals to avoid blood glucose levels that are too high or too low for you. Eating about the same amount of carbs at each meal can be helpful. Your eating plan will also teach you how to stick with your plan at home and when you eat out. Eating healthy to control your blood glucose does take some effort. But the reward is a chance to live your healthiest life with diabetes. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Fat is a type of nutrient. You need some fat in your diet but not too much. Fats give you energy and help your body absorb vitamins. Dietary fat also plays a major role in your cholesterol levels . But not all fats are the same. You should try to avoid: Saturated fats such as butter, solid shortening, and lard Trans fats. These are found in vegetable shortenings, some margarines, crackers, cookies, snack foods, and other foods made with or fried in partially hydrogenated oils (PHOs). By 2018, most U.S. companies will not be allowed to add PHOs to food. Try to replace them with oils such as canola, olive, safflower, sesame, or sunflower. Of course, eating too much fat will put on the pounds.  Fat has twice as many calories as proteins or carbohydrates. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Fiber is a substance in plants. Dietary fiber is the kind you eat. It's a type of carbohydrate . You may also see it listed on a food label as soluble fiber or insoluble fiber. Both types have important health benefits. Good sources of dietary fiber include: Whole grains Nuts and seeds Fruit and vegetables Dietary fiber adds bulk to your diet and makes you feel full faster, helping you control your weight. It helps digestion and helps prevent constipation . Most Americans don't eat enough dietary fiber. But add it to your diet slowly. Increasing dietary fiber too quickly can lead to gas , bloating, and cramps. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Protein is in every cell in the body. Our bodies need protein from the foods we eat to build and maintain bones, muscles and skin. We get proteins in our diet from meat, dairy products, nuts, and certain grains and beans. Proteins from meat and other animal products are complete proteins. This means they supply all of the amino acids the body can't make on its own. Most plant proteins are incomplete. You should eat different types of plant proteins every day to get all of the amino acids your body needs. It is important to get enough dietary protein. You need to eat protein every day, because your body doesn't store it the way it stores fats or carbohydrates.  How much you need depends on your age, sex, health, and level of physical activity. Most Americans eat enough protein in their diet.

Dietary supplements are vitamins , minerals , herbs , and many other products.  They can come as pills, capsules, powders, drinks, and energy bars. Supplements do not have to go through the testing that drugs do. Some supplements can play an important role in health. For example, calcium and vitamin D are important for keeping bones strong. Pregnant women can take the vitamin folic acid to prevent certain birth defects in their babies. To take a supplement as safely as possible: Tell your health care provider about any dietary supplements you use Do not take a bigger dose than the label recommends Check with your health care provider about the supplements you take if you are going to have any type of surgery Read trustworthy information about the supplement NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

If you are overweight or have obesity , losing weight can improve your health. It might also help you prevent weight-related diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes, arthritis and some cancers.  A healthy diet is an important part of a weight-loss program. It: May include fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products May include lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, eggs and nuts Goes easy on saturated fats, trans fat, cholesterol, salt (sodium), and added sugars The key to losing weight is to burn more calories than you eat and drink. A diet can help you to do this through portion control.  There are many different types of diets. Some, like the Mediterranean diet, describe a traditional way of eating from a specific region. Others, like the DASH eating plan or a diet to lower cholesterol , were designed for people who have certain health problems. But they may also help you to lose weight. There are also fad or crash diets that severely restrict calories or the types of food you are allowed to eat. They may sound promising, but they rarely lead to permanent weight loss. They also may not provide all of the nutrients your body needs. In addition to a diet, adding exercise into your daily life can help you to lose weight. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

We all need to drink water. How much you need depends on your size, activity level, and the weather where you live. The water you drink is a combination of surface water and groundwater. Surface water includes rivers, lakes and reservoirs.  Groundwater comes from underground.  The United States has one of the safest water supplies in the world, but drinking water quality can vary from place to place. It depends on the condition of the source water and the treatment it receives. Treatment may include adding fluoride to prevent cavities and chlorine to kill 
germs. Your water supplier must give you annual reports on drinking water. The reports include where your water came from and what contaminants are in it. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are eating disorders? Eating disorders are serious mental health disorders. They involve severe problems with your thoughts about food and your eating behaviors. You may eat much less or much more than you need. Eating disorders are medical conditions; they are not a lifestyle choice. They affect your body's ability to get proper nutrition. This can lead to health issues, such as heart and kidney problems, or sometimes even death. But there are treatments that can help. What are the types of eating disorders? Common types of eating disorders include: Binge-eating , which is out-of-control eating. People with binge-eating disorder keep eating even after they are full. They often eat until they feel very uncomfortable. Afterward, they usually have feelings of guilt, shame, and distress. Eating too much too often can lead to weight gain and obesity . Binge-eating disorder is the most common eating disorder in the U.S. Bulimia nervosa. People with bulimia nervosa also have periods of binge-eating. But afterwards, they purge, by making themselves throw up or using laxatives. They may also over-exercise or fast. People with bulimia nervosa may be slightly underweight, normal weight, or overweight. Anorexia nervosa. People with anorexia nervosa avoid food, severely restrict food, or eat very small quantities of only certain foods. They may see themselves as overweight, even when they are dangerously underweight. Anorexia nervosa is the least common of the three eating disorders, but it is often the most serious. It has the highest death rate of any mental disorder. What causes eating disorders? The exact cause of eating disorders is unknown. Researchers believe that eating disorders are caused by a complex interaction of factors. These include genetic, biological, behavioral, psychological, and social factors. Who is at risk for eating disorders? Anyone can develop an eating disorder, but they are more common in women. Eating disorders frequently appear during the teen years or young adulthood. But people can also develop them during childhood or later in life. What are the symptoms of eating disorders? The symptoms of eating disorders vary, depending on the disorder: The symptoms of binge-eating include: Eating unusually large amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as a 2-hour period Eating even when you're full or not hungry Eating fast during binge episodes Eating until you're uncomfortably full Eating alone or in secret to avoid embarrassment Feeling distressed, ashamed, or guilty about your eating Frequently dieting, possibly without weight loss The symptoms of bulimia nervosa include the same symptoms as binge-eating, plus trying to get rid of the food or weight after binging by: Purging, making yourself throw up or using laxatives or enemas to speed up the movement of food through your body Doing intensive and excessive exercise Fasting Over time, bulimia nervosa can cause health problems such as: Chronically inflamed and sore throat Swollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw area Worn tooth enamel and increasingly sensitive and decaying teeth . This is caused by the exposure to stomach acid every time you throw up. GERD (acid reflux) and other gastrointestinal problems Severe dehydration from purging Electrolyte imbalance , which could be too low or too high levels of sodium, calcium, potassium and other minerals. This can lead to a stroke or heart attack . The symptoms of anorexia nervosa include: Eating very little, to the point of starving yourself Intensive and excessive exercise Extreme thinness Intense fear of gaining weight Distorted body image - seeing yourself as overweight even when you are severely underweight Over time, anorexia nervosa can cause health problems such as: Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis ) Mild anemia Muscle wasting and weakness Thin, brittle hair and nails Dry, blotchy, or yellowish skin Growth of fine hair all over the body Severe constipation Low blood pressure Slowed breathing and pulse Feeling cold all the time because of a drop in internal body temperature Feeling faint, dizzy , or weak Feeling tired all the time Infertility Damage to the structure and function of the heart Brain damage Multiorgan failure Anorexia nervosa can be fatal. Some people with this disorder die of complications from starvation, and others die of suicide . Some people with eating disorders may also have other mental disorders (such as depression or anxiety ) or problems with substance use . How is eating disorders diagnosed? Because eating disorders can be so serious, it is important to seek help if you or a loved one thinks that you might have a problem. Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. It is important to be honest about your eating and exercise behaviors so your provider can help you. A physical exam Blood or urine tests to rule out other possible causes of your symptoms Other tests to see whether you have any other health problems caused by the eating disorder. These can include kidney function tests and an electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG). What are the treatments for eating disorders? Treatment plans for eating disorders are tailored to individual needs. You will likely have a team of providers helping you, including doctors, nutritionists, nurses, and therapists. The treatments may include: Individual, group, and/or family psychotherapy. Individual therapy may include cognitive behavioral approaches, which help you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns. Medical care and monitoring, including care for the complications that eating disorders can cause Nutrition counseling. Doctors, nurses, and counselors will help you eat healthy to reach and maintain a healthy weight. Medicines, such as antidepressants , antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers, may help treat some eating disorders. The medicines can also help with the depression and anxiety symptoms that often go along with eating disorders. Some people with serious eating disorders may need to be in a hospital or in a residential treatment program. Residential treatment programs combine housing and treatment services. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What are electrolytes? Electrolytes are minerals that have an electric charge when they are dissolved in water or body fluids, including blood. The electric charge can be positive or negative. You have electrolytes in your blood, urine (pee), tissues, and other body fluids. Electrolytes are important because they help: Balance the amount of water in your body Balance your body's acid/base (pH) level Move nutrients into your cells Move wastes out of your cells Support your muscle and nerve function Keep your heart rate and rhythm steady Keep your blood pressure stable Keep your bones and teeth healthy What are the different types of electrolytes in your body? The main electrolytes in your body include: Bicarbonate, which helps maintain the body's acid and base balance (pH). It also plays an important role in moving carbon dioxide through the bloodstream. Calcium , which helps make and keep bones and teeth strong. Chloride, which also helps control the amount of fluid in the body. In addition, it helps maintain healthy blood volume and blood pressure. Magnesium, which helps your muscles, nerves, and heart work properly. It also helps control blood pressure and blood glucose (blood sugar). Phosphate, which works together with calcium to build strong bones and teeth. Potassium , which helps your cells, heart, and muscles work properly. Sodium , which helps control the amount of fluid in the body. It also helps your nerves and muscles work properly. You get these electrolytes from the foods you eat and the fluids you drink. What is an electrolyte imbalance? An electrolyte imbalance means that the level of one or more electrolytes in your body is too low or too high. It can happen when the amount of water in your body changes. The amount of water that you take in should equal the amount you lose. If something upsets this balance, you may have too little water ( dehydration ) or too much water (overhydration). Some of the more common reasons why you might have an imbalance of the water in your body include: Certain medicines Severe vomiting and/or diarrhea Heavy sweating Heart , liver or kidney problems Not drinking enough fluids, especially when doing intense exercise or when the weather is very hot Drinking too much water What are the different types of electrolyte imbalances? The names of the different types of electrolyte imbalances are: Electrolyte Too low Too high Bicarbonate Acidosis Alkalosis Calcium Hypocalcemia Hypercalcemia Chloride Hypochloremia Hyperchloremia Magnesium Hypomagnesemia Hypermagnesemia Phosphate Hypophosphatemia Hyperphosphatemia Potassium Hypokalemia Hyperkalemia Sodium Hyponatremia Hypernatremia How are electrolyte imbalances diagnosed? A test called an electrolyte panel can check the levels of your body's main electrolytes. A related test, the anion gap blood test , checks whether your electrolytes are out of balance or if your blood is too acidic or not acidic enough. What are the treatments for electrolyte imbalances? The treatment for an electrolyte imbalance depends on which electrolytes are out of balance, if there is too little or too many, and what is causing the imbalance. In minor cases, you may just need to make some changes to your diet. In other cases, you may need other treatments. For example: If you don't have enough of an electrolyte, you may get electrolyte replacement therapy. This involves giving you more of that electrolyte. It could be a medicine or supplement that you swallow or drink, or it may be given intravenously (by IV). If you have too much of an electrolyte, your provider may give you medicines or fluids (by mouth or by IV) to help remove that electrolyte from your body. In severe cases, you may need dialysis to filter out the electrolyte.

Folic acid is a B vitamin . It helps the body make healthy new cells. Everyone needs folic acid. For women who may get pregnant, it is really important.  Getting enough folic acid before and during pregnancy can prevent major birth defects of her baby's brain or spine. Foods with folic acid in them include: Leafy green vegetables Fruits Dried beans, peas, and nuts Enriched breads, cereals and other grain products If you don't get enough folic acid from the foods you eat, you can also take it as a dietary supplement . NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

What is a food allergy? A food allergy is an abnormal immune system reaction to certain foods. Your immune system normally protects you from germs. But if you have a food allergy, your immune system mistakenly reacts to certain foods as if they were harmful. This reaction is usually mild. But in some cases, it can be serious or even life-threatening. A food intolerance is different than a food allergy. If you have a food intolerance, you also have symptoms when you eat that food. But these are typically just digestive symptoms such as bloating and gas . Also, an intolerance is not an immune system reaction. Most food allergies are caused by: Cow's milk Chicken eggs Crustacean shellfish, such as shrimp, crab, lobster, and crayfish Fish Peanuts Sesame Soy Tree nuts, such as almonds, walnuts, pecans Wheat People with a food allergy may be allergic to more than one type of food. Who is more likely to develop a food allergy? Both children and adults can have food allergies. Some children will outgrow their food allergies. And sometimes people can develop food allergies as adult. Certain factors can make you more likely to have a food allergy. They include: Having eczema , a disease that causes inflammation, redness, and irritation of the skin. Your immune system also plays a role in eczema. Having asthma or other allergies , such as hay fever . Your genes. Certain genes may influence the development of food allergies. And you are more likely to have food allergies if someone in your family has allergies, asthma, or eczema. What are the symptoms of food allergies? If you are allergic to a food you have eaten, you may have a variety of symptoms. These symptoms are not always the same for every person. And the symptoms that you get each time you eat the food may not always be the same. For example, your symptoms may sometimes depend on how much of the food you ate. Food allergy symptoms usually start within a few minutes to two hours after you eat that food. They may include: Hives Flushed skin or rash Tingling or itchy sensation in the mouth Face, tongue, or lip swelling Vomiting and/or diarrhea Abdominal (belly) cramps Coughing or wheezing Dizziness and/or lightheadedness Swelling of the throat and vocal cords Trouble breathing In rare cases, a food allergy can cause a life-threatening reaction called anaphylaxis . It may start out with some milder symptoms, but then it becomes more serious. It can lead to: Narrowed airways in the lungs Severe trouble breathing because of swelling in the throat Severe lowering of blood pressure and shock ("anaphylactic shock") Loss of consciousness This is a medical emergency. Call 911 if someone is having the symptoms of anaphylaxis. How are food allergies diagnosed? To find out if you have a food allergy, your health care provider will Ask about your symptoms, family health history, and medical history, including other allergies. Likely do a physical exam. Do food allergy testing . This could involve skin testing, blood testing, a food elimination diet, and/or an oral food challenge test. An oral food challenge test is the most accurate food allergy test. What are the treatments for food allergies? There is no cure for food allergies. The only way to prevent a reaction is to avoid eating the food that you are allergic to. There are medicines for people with food allergies. They include: Medicines to reduce food allergy symptoms, including antihistamines and corticosteroids . Medicines to reduce allergic reactions, including severe reactions. Epinephrine, a medicine to treat anaphylaxis. Your provider may give you a prescription for an epinephrine auto-injector. It is a device used to inject epinephrine when someone is having symptoms of anaphylaxis. If you have been prescribed one, it's important to learn how to use it and to carry it with you at all times. If you have a food allergy, it's a good idea to have a medical alert bracelet that says what your allergy is.

Each year, around 48 million people in the United States get sick from contaminated food. Common causes include bacteria and viruses. Less often, the cause may be a parasite or a harmful chemical, such as a high amount of pesticides. Symptoms of foodborne illness depend on the cause. They can be mild or serious. They usually include: Upset stomach Abdominal cramps Nausea and vomiting Diarrhea Fever Dehydration Most foodborne illnesses are acute. This means that they happen suddenly and last a short time. It takes several steps to get food from the farm or fishery to your dining table. Contamination can happen during any of these steps. For example, it can happen to: Raw meat during slaughter Fruits and vegetables when they are growing or when they are processed Refrigerated foods when they are left on a loading dock in warm weather But it can also happen in your kitchen if you leave food out for more than 2 hours at room temperature. Handling food safely can help prevent foodborne illnesses. Most people with foodborne illness get better on their own. It is important to replace lost fluids and electrolytes to prevent dehydration. If your health care provider can diagnose the specific cause, you may get medicines such as antibiotics to treat it. For more serious illness, you may need treatment at a hospital. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

All packaged foods and beverages in the U.S. have food labels. These "Nutrition Facts" labels can help you make smarter food choices and eat a healthy diet. Before you read the food label, you should know a few things: Serving size is based on how much people usually eat and drink at one time Number of servings tells you how many servings are in the container. Some labels will give you information about calories and nutrients for both the whole package and each serving size. But many labels just tell you that information for each serving size. You need to think about the serving size when you decide how much to eat or drink. For example, if a bottle of juice has two servings and you drink the whole bottle, then you are getting twice the amount of sugar that is listed on the label. Percent daily value (%DV) is a number that helps you understand how much of a nutrient is in one serving. Experts recommend that you get certain amount of different nutrients daily. %DV tells you what percentage of the daily recommendation you get from one serving of a food. With this, you can figure out if a food is high or low in a nutrient: 5% or less is low, 20% or more is high. The information on a food label can help you see how a certain food or drink fits into your overall diet. The label lists, per serving,: The number of calories Fats , including total fat, saturated fat, and trans fat Cholesterol Sodium Carbohydrates , including fiber , total sugar, and added sugar Protein Vitamins and Minerals Food and Drug Administration

Safe steps in food handling, cooking, and storage can prevent foodborne illness . There are four basic steps to food safety at home: Clean - always wash your fruits and vegetables, hands, counters, and cooking utensils. Separate - keep raw foods to themselves. Germs can spread from one food to another. Cook - foods need to get hot and stay hot. Heat kills germs. Chill - put fresh food in the refrigerator right away. In the grocery store, avoid cans that are bulging or jars that have cracks or loose lids. Check packages to be sure food hasn't reached its expiration date. United States Department of Agriculture

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that's found in all the cells in your body. Your liver makes cholesterol, and it is also in some foods, such as meat and dairy products. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly. But having too much cholesterol in your blood raises your risk of coronary artery disease . What are HDL and LDL? HDL and LDL are two types of lipoproteins.They are a combination of fat (lipid) and protein.  The lipids need to be attached to the proteins so they can move through the blood. HDL and LDL have different purposes: HDL stands for high-density lipoproteins. It is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol because it carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Your liver then removes the cholesterol from your body. LDL stands for low-density lipoproteins. It is sometimes called the "bad" cholesterol because a high LDL level leads to a buildup of cholesterol in your arteries. How do I know what my HDL level is? A blood test can measure your cholesterol levels, including HDL. When and how often you should get this test depends on your age, risk factors, and family history.  The general recommendations are: For people who are age 19 or younger: : The first test should be between ages 9 to 11 Children should have the test again every 5 years Some children may have this test starting at age 2 if there is a family history of high blood cholesterol, heart attack, or stroke For people who are age 20 or older: : Younger adults should have the test every 5 years Men ages 45 to 65 and women ages 55 to 65 should have it every 1 to 2 years What should my HDL level be? With HDL cholesterol, higher numbers are better, because a high HDL level can lower your risk for coronary artery disease and stroke . How high your HDL should be depends on your age and sex: Group Healthy HDL Level Age 19 or younger More than 45mg/dl Men age 20 or older More than 40mg/dl Women age 20 or older More than 50mg/dl How can I raise my HDL level? If your HDL level is too low, lifestyle changes may help. These changes may also help prevent other diseases, and make you feel better overall: Eat a healthy diet. To raise your HDL level, you need to eat good fats instead of bad fats. This means limiting saturated fats, which include full-fat milk and cheese, high-fat meats like sausage and bacon, and foods made with butter, lard, and shortening. You should also avoid trans fats, which may be in some margarines, fried foods, and processed foods like baked goods. Instead, eat unsaturated fats, which are found in avocado, vegetable oils like olive oil, and nuts. Limit carbohydrates, especially sugar. Also try to eat more foods naturally high in fiber, such as oatmeal and beans. Stay at a healthy weight. You can boost your HDL level by losing weight, especially if you have lots of fat around your waist. Exercise. Getting regular exercise can raise your HDL level, as well as lower your LDL. You should try to do 30 minutes of moderate to vigorous aerobic exercise on most, if not all, days. Avoid cigarettes. Smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke can lower your HDL level. If you are a smoker, ask your health care provider for help in finding the best way for you to quit . You should also try to avoid secondhand smoke. Limit alcohol. Moderate alcohol may lower your HDL level, although more studies are needed to confirm that. What we do know is that too much alcohol can make you gain weight, and that lowers your HDL level. Some cholesterol medicines , including certain statins , can raise your HDL level, in addition to lowering your LDL level. Health care providers don't usually prescribe medicines only to raise HDL. But if you have a low HDL and high LDL level, you might need medicine. What else can affect my HDL level? Taking certain medicines can lower HDL levels in some people. They include: Beta blockers, a type of blood pressure medicine Anabolic steroids , including testosterone, a male hormone Progestins, which are female hormones that are in some birth control pills and hormone replacement therapy Benzodiazepines, sedatives that are often used for anxiety and insomnia If you are taking one of these and you have a very low HDL level, ask your provider if you should continue to take them. Diabetes can also lower your HDL level, so that gives you another reason to manage your diabetes .

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that's found in all the cells in the body. The liver makes cholesterol, and it is also in some foods, such as meat and dairy products. The body needs some cholesterol to work properly. But if your child or teen has high cholesterol (too much cholesterol in the blood), it can stick to the walls of their arteries and narrow or even block the arteries. This can put your child or teen at risk of coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . What causes high cholesterol in children and teens? Three main factors contribute to high cholesterol in children and teens: An unhealthy diet, especially one that is high in saturated fats A family history of high cholesterol, especially when one or both parents have high cholesterol Having obesity Some diseases, such as diabetes , kidney disease , and certain thyroid diseases , can also cause high cholesterol in children and teens. What are the symptoms of high cholesterol in children and teens? There are usually no signs or symptoms that your child or teen has high cholesterol. How do I know if my child or teen has high cholesterol? There is a blood test to measure cholesterol levels. The test gives information about: Total cholesterol . This is a measure of the total amount of cholesterol in your blood. It includes both low-density lipoprotein ( LDL ) cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein ( HDL ) cholesterol. LDL cholesterol. LDL is often called "bad" cholesterol because it is the main source of cholesterol buildup and blockage in the arteries. HDL cholesterol. HDL is often called "good" cholesterol because it helps remove cholesterol from your arteries. Non-HDL. This number is your total cholesterol minus your HDL. Your non-HDL includes LDL and other types of cholesterol such as VLDL (very-low-density lipoprotein). Triglycerides . This is another type of fat in your blood that can raise the risk of heart disease. For anyone aged 19 or younger, the healthy levels of cholesterol are Type of Cholesterol Healthy Level Total Cholesterol Less than 170 mg/dL Non-HDL Less than 120 mg/dL LDL Less than 110 mg/dL HDL More than 45 mg/dL When and how often your child or teen should get this test depends on their age, risk factors, and family history. The general recommendations are: The first test should be between ages 9 to 11 Children should have the test again every 5 years Some children may have this test starting at age 2 if there is a family history of high cholesterol, heart attack , or stroke What are the treatments for high cholesterol in children and teens? Lifestyle changes are the main treatment for high cholesterol in children and teens. These changes include: Being more active. This includes getting regular physical activity and spending less time sitting (in front of a television, at a computer, on a phone or tablet, etc.). Healthy eating. A diet to lower cholesterol includes limiting foods that are high in saturated fat, sugar, and cholesterol. It is also important to eat plenty of fresh fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. Losing weight, if your child or teen is overweight or has obesity. If everyone in the family makes these changes, it will be easier for your child or teen to stick to them. It is also an opportunity to improve your health, and the health of the rest of your family. Sometimes these lifestyle changes are not enough to lower your child or teen's cholesterol. Their health care provider may consider giving your child or teen cholesterol medicines if they: Are at least 10 years old. Have an LDL (bad) cholesterol level that is higher than 190 mg/dL, even after six months of diet and exercise changes. Have an LDL (bad) cholesterol level that is higher than 160 mg/dL AND are at high risk for heart disease. Have familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). FH is an inherited disorder that causes very high levels of cholesterol in the blood.

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that that's found in all the cells in your body. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly.  But if you have too much of it in your blood, it can stick to the walls of your arteries and narrow or even block them. This puts you at risk for coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . Cholesterol is made by your liver. It travels through the blood on proteins called lipoproteins. One type of lipoprotein, LDL , is sometimes called the "bad" cholesterol. A high LDL level leads to a buildup of cholesterol in your arteries. Another type, HDL , is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol. It carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Then your liver removes the cholesterol from your body. There are steps that you can take to lower your LDL (bad) cholesterol and raise your HDL (good) cholesterol. By keeping your cholesterol levels in range , you can lower your risk of heart diseases . What are the main treatments for high cholesterol? The main treatments for high cholesterol are lifestyle changes and medicines. Lifestyle changes to lower cholesterol Heart-healthy lifestyle changes that can help you lower or control your cholesterol include: Heart-healthy eating. A heart-healthy eating plan limits the amount of saturated and trans fats that you eat. It recommends that you eat and drink only enough calories to stay at a healthy weight and avoid weight gain. It also encourages you to choose a variety of nutritious foods, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean meats. Examples of eating plans that can lower your cholesterol include the Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes diet and the DASH eating plan . Aiming for a healthy weight . If you are overweight or have obesity , losing weight can help lower your LDL cholesterol and raise your HDL cholesterol. This is especially important for people with metabolic syndrome . Metabolic syndrome is a group of conditions that together raise your risk of heart diseases and other health problems. Getting regular physical activity . Studies have shown that physical activity can lower LDL cholesterol and triglycerides and raise your HDL cholesterol.  Before you start an exercise program, ask your health care provider what level of physical activity is right for you. Managing stress . Research has shown that chronic stress can sometimes raise your LDL cholesterol and lower your HDL cholesterol. Quitting smoking . Quitting smoking can raise your HDL cholesterol. Since HDL helps to remove LDL cholesterol from your arteries, having more HDL can help to lower your LDL cholesterol. Getting enough good-quality sleep . Getting 7 to 9 hours of sleep every night lowers your risk of high LDL  cholesterol and total cholesterol levels. Medicines to lower cholesterol For some people, making lifestyle changes alone does not their lower cholesterol enough. They may also need to take cholesterol medicines . There are several types. They work in different ways and can have different side effects . If your provider recommends that you take cholesterol medicines, ask them which medicine would be right for you. Even if you take medicines to lower your cholesterol, you still need to continue with lifestyle changes. What are some other possible treatments for high cholesterol? Some other possible treatments for high cholesterol may include: Lipoprotein apheresis to lower cholesterol Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited condition that causes very high levels of cholesterol in the blood. Some people who have FH may get a treatment called lipoprotein apheresis. This treatment uses a filtering machine to remove LDL cholesterol from your blood. Then the machine returns the rest of your blood back to your body. Supplements to lower cholesterol Many companies sell supplements that they say can lower cholesterol. For many of these supplements, there isn't enough evidence to show that they can lower cholesterol levels. But for some supplements, research has found that they have cholesterol-lowering effects. For example: Plant stanols and sterols supplements, when taken with meals, can reduce cholesterol levels. Some soy products have a small cholesterol-lowering effect. But research has found that eating soy foods gives you more of a benefit than taking supplements. Whole flaxseed and flaxseed lignans may help to lower cholesterol levels. However, flaxseed oil does not. Garlic supplements may lower cholesterol levels, but the effect is small when compared to the effects of cholesterol medicines. Supplements may cause side effects and interactions with medicines. Always check with your provider before you take any supplements.

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that that's found in all the cells in your body. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly. But if you have too much of it in your blood, it can stick to the walls of your arteries and narrow or even block them. This puts you at risk for coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . Cholesterol is made by your liver. It travels through the blood on proteins called lipoproteins. One type of lipoprotein, LDL , is sometimes called the "bad" cholesterol. A high LDL level leads to a buildup of cholesterol in your arteries. Another type, HDL , is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol. It carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Then your liver removes the cholesterol from your body. What are the treatments for high cholesterol? The main treatments for high cholesterol are heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines . The lifestyle changes include healthy eating, weight management, and regular physical activity. How can I lower cholesterol with diet? Heart-healthy lifestyle changes include a diet to lower your cholesterol. The DASH eating plan is one example. Another is the Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes (TLC) diet, which recommends that you: Choose healthier fats. You should limit both total fat and saturated fat. No more than 25 to 35% of your daily calories should come from dietary fats , and less than 7% of your daily calories should come from saturated fat. Depending upon how many calories you eat per day, here are the maximum amounts of saturated fats that you should eat: Calories per Day Saturated Fat 1,200 8 grams 1,500 10 grams 2,000 13 grams 2,500 17 grams Saturated fat is a bad fat because it raises your LDL (bad cholesterol) level more than anything else in your diet. It is found in some meats, dairy products, chocolate, baked goods, and deep-fried and processed foods. Instead of saturated fats, switch to foods with healthier fats, such as lean meat, nuts, and unsaturated oils like canola, olive, and safflower oils. Limit foods with cholesterol. If you are trying to lower your cholesterol, you should have less than 200 mg a day of cholesterol. Cholesterol is in foods from animals, such as liver and other organ meats, egg yolks, shrimp, and whole milk dairy products. Eat plenty of soluble fiber . Soluble fiber helps prevent your digestive tract from absorbing cholesterol. You should try to get 10 to 25 grams of it per day. Foods that are high in soluble fiber include: Whole-grain cereals such as oatmeal and oat bran Fruits such as apples, bananas, oranges, pears, and prunes Legumes such as kidney beans, lentils, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, and lima beans Eat lots of fruits and vegetables. They are important sources of vitamins, fiber, and other nutrients. Increase plant stanols and sterols in your diet. These are substances that also help prevent your digestive tract from absorbing cholesterol. You should try to get 2 grams of them per day. They can be found in whole grains, nuts, legumes, and oils, such as olive oil and avocado oil. They are also added to some foods, such as certain types of orange juice, margarine, and bread. Eat foods that are high in omega-3 fatty acids. These special fats can lower LDL and triglyceride levels. They can also help control blood pressure and may lower your risk of heart rhythm problems . If you have heart disease, they may lower your risk of heart attack .  Omega-3 fatty acids can be found in: Fish such as salmon, tuna (canned or fresh), and mackerel. Most people should try to eat these fish two times a week. But if you are pregnant or breastfeeding, you should avoid fish that could be high in mercury , such as mackerel. Plant sources such as walnuts, flaxseed, chia seeds, and canola and soybean oils. But they have smaller amounts of omega-3 acids than the fish sources. Fortified foods, such as certain brands of eggs, yogurt, juices, milk, soy beverages, and infant formulas. Limit salt. You should try to limit the amount of sodium (salt) that you eat to no more than 2,300 milligrams (about 1 teaspoon of salt) a day. That includes all the sodium you eat, whether it's added in cooking, used at the table, or already present in food products. Limiting salt won't lower your cholesterol, but it can lower your risk of heart diseases by helping to lower your blood pressure . You can reduce your sodium by instead choosing low-salt and "no added salt" foods and seasonings at the table or while cooking. Limit alcohol . Alcohol adds extra calories, which can lead to weight gain. Being overweight can raise your LDL level and lower your HDL level. Too much alcohol can also increase your risk of heart diseases because it can raise your blood pressure and triglyceride level. It's best not to drink, but if you do: Have no more than 2 drinks per day if you are a man Have no more than 1 drink per day if you are a woman Nutrition labels can help you figure out how much fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, fiber, and sodium is in the foods that you buy. This can help you eat healthier and lower your cholesterol. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Food provides the energy and nutrients that babies need to be healthy. For a 
baby, breast milk is best. It has all the necessary vitamins and minerals. Infant formulas are available for babies whose mothers are not able to or decide not to breastfeed. Infants are usually ready to eat solid foods at about 6 months of age. Check with your health care provider for the best time for your baby to start. If you introduce one new food at a time, you will be able to identify any foods that cause allergies in your baby. Allergic reactions include a a rash , diarrhea , or vomiting . Many parents are concerned about peanut allergies. When babies can eat foods that contain peanuts depends on their risk of food allergies: Most babies can have peanut products when they are about 6 months of age Babies who have mild to moderate eczema have a higher risk of food allergies. They usually can eat peanut products at about 6 months of age. If you have concerns about this, check with your baby's health care provider. Babies who have severe eczema or egg allergies are at high risk for peanut allergies. If your baby is at high risk, check with your baby's health care provider. Your baby may need allergy testing. Your baby's provider can also recommend when and how to give your baby peanut products. There are some foods that you should avoid feeding your baby: Do not give your baby honey before 1 year of age. Honey may contain bacteria that can cause botulism in babies. Avoid cow's milk before age 1, since it does not have all of the nutrients that babies need and babies cannot digest it Unpasteurized drinks or foods (such as juices, milks, yogurt, or cheeses) may put your child at risk for an E. coli infection . E coli is a harmful bacteria that can cause severe diarrhea. Certain foods that can cause choking , such as hard candy, popcorn, whole nuts, and grapes (unless they are cut into small pieces). Don't give your child these foods before age 3. Because it contains a lot of sugar, babies should not drink juice before age 1

What is iron? Iron is a mineral that our bodies need for growth and development. Your body uses iron to make hemoglobin, a protein in red blood cells. Hemoglobin carries oxygen from the lungs to all parts of the body. Iron is also important for healthy muscles, bone marrow, and organ function. Your body also needs iron to make some hormones . How do you get iron? Iron is found naturally in many foods and is added to some fortified food products. Foods that are high in iron include: Lean meat, seafood, and poultry Iron-fortified breakfast cereals and breads White beans, lentils, spinach, kidney beans, and peas Nuts and some dried fruits, such as raisins Iron is available in supplements, either on its own or as part of many multivitamin/mineral supplements. What causes low iron? Most people in the United States get enough iron. The amount that you need each day depends on your age, your sex, and whether you consume a mostly plant-based diet. Sometimes people can have trouble getting enough iron. There can be many causes, including blood loss, a poor diet, or a problem absorbing enough iron from foods. Those who are more likely to have low iron include people who: Have heavy periods Are pregnant or breastfeeding Are infants (especially if they were born premature or low birth weight ) Are frequent blood donors Have cancer , certain digestive diseases , or heart failure Are on kidney dialysis Have trouble absorbing iron because they: Have a digestive condition such as celiac disease , ulcerative colitis , Crohn's disease , or Helicobacter pylori infection Had weight loss surgery What happens if you don't get enough iron? If you have too little iron, you may develop iron-deficiency anemia . It may not cause symptoms at first, but over time, it can cause fatigue , shortness of breath , and trouble with memory and concentration. Treatment for low iron and iron-deficiency anemia is usually with iron supplements. What happens if you get too much iron? Too much iron can damage your body. For example, if you are healthy and take too many iron supplements, you may have symptoms such as constipation , nausea and vomiting , abdominal (belly) pain , and diarrhea . Higher iron levels can cause ulcers . Extremely high levels can lead to organ damage, coma , and death. A disease called hemochromatosis can cause too much iron to build up in the body. Hemochromatosis is inherited (passed down through families). It is usually treated by removing blood (and iron) from your body on a regular basis. National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplements

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that's found in all the cells in your body. Your liver makes cholesterol, and it is also in some foods, such as meat and dairy products. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly. But having too much cholesterol in your blood raises your risk of coronary artery disease . What are LDL and HDL? LDL and HDL are two types of lipoproteins. They are a combination of fat (lipid) and protein. The lipids need to be attached to the proteins so they can move through the blood. LDL and HDL have different purposes: LDL stands for low-density lipoproteins. It is sometimes called the "bad" cholesterol because a high LDL level leads to a buildup of cholesterol in your arteries. HDL stands for high-density lipoproteins. It is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol because it carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Your liver then removes the cholesterol from your body. How can a high LDL level raise my risk of coronary artery disease and other diseases? If you have a high LDL level, this means that you have too much LDL cholesterol in your blood. This extra LDL, along with other substances, forms plaque. The plaque builds up in your arteries; this is a condition called atherosclerosis . Coronary artery disease happens when the plaque buildup is in the arteries of your heart. It causes the arteries to become hardened and narrowed, which slows down or blocks the blood flow to your heart. Because your blood carries oxygen to your heart, this means that your heart may not be able to get enough oxygen. This can cause angina (chest pain), or if the blood flow is completely blocked, a heart attack . How do I know what my LDL level is? A blood test can measure your cholesterol levels, including LDL. When and how often you should get this test depends on your age, risk factors, and family history. The general recommendations are: For people who are age 19 or younger: : The first test should be between ages 9 to 11 Children should have the test again every 5 years Some children may have this test starting at age 2 if there is a family history of high blood cholesterol, heart attack, or stroke For people who are age 20 or older: : Younger adults should have the test every 5 years Men ages 45 to 65 and women ages 55 to 65 should have it every 1 to 2 years For people who are older than 65: They should have the test every year. You may need to get your cholesterol checked more often if you have heart disease , diabetes , or a family history of high cholesterol. What can affect my LDL level? Things that can affect your LDL level include: Diet. Saturated fat and cholesterol in the food you eat make your LDL level rise Weight. Being overweight tends to raise your LDL level, lower your HDL level, and increase your total cholesterol level Physical Activity. A lack of physical activity can lead to weight gain, which can raise your LDL level Smoking. Cigarette smoking lowers your HDL cholesterol. Since HDL helps to remove LDL from your arteries, if you have less HDL, that can contribute to you having a higher LDL level. Age and Sex. As women and men get older, their cholesterol levels rise. Before the age of menopause, women have lower total cholesterol levels than men of the same age. After the age of menopause, women's LDL levels tend to rise. Genetics. Your genes partly determine how much cholesterol your body makes. High cholesterol can run in families. For example, familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited form of high blood cholesterol. Medicines. Certain medicines, including steroids , some blood pressure medicines , and HIV medicines , can raise your LDL level. Other medical conditions. Diseases such as chronic kidney disease , diabetes, and HIV can cause a higher LDL level. Race or ethnicity. People from certain racial or ethnic groups may have an increased risk of high blood cholesterol. For example, African Americans typically have higher HDL and LDL cholesterol levels than White Americans. Asian Americans are more likely to have higher LDL levels than other groups. What should my LDL level be? With LDL cholesterol, lower numbers are better, because a high LDL level can raise your risk for coronary artery disease and related problems. The general ranges for healthy adults are: LDL (Bad) Cholesterol Level LDL Cholesterol Category Less than 100 mg/dL Optimal 100-129 mg/dL Near optimal/above optimal 130-159 mg/dL Borderline high 160-189 mg/dL High 190 mg/dL and above Very High If you have coronary artery disease or are at high risk for it, your health care provider may have different goals for your LDL level. How can I lower my LDL level? There are two main ways to lower your LDL cholesterol level: Heart-healthy lifestyle changes, which include: Heart-healthy eating. A heart-healthy eating plan limits the amount of saturated and trans fats that you eat. Examples of eating plans that can lower your LDL level include the Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes diet and the DASH eating plan . Weight management . If you are overweight, losing weight can help lower your LDL level. Physical Activity. Everyone should get regular physical activity . Drug Treatment. If lifestyle changes alone do not lower your LDL level enough, you may also need to take medicines. There are several types of cholesterol-lowering drugs available, including statins . The medicines work in different ways and can have different side effects. Talk to your provider about which one is right for you.  While you are taking medicines to lower your LDL level, you still should continue with the lifestyle changes. Some people with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) may receive a treatment called lipoprotein apheresis. This treatment uses a filtering machine to remove LDL cholesterol from the blood. Then the machine returns the rest of the blood back to the person. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Your small intestine does most of the digesting of the foods you eat. If you have a malabsorption syndrome, your small intestine cannot absorb nutrients from foods. Causes of malabsorption syndromes include: Celiac disease Lactose intolerance Short bowel syndrome. This happens after surgery to remove half or more of the small intestine. You might need the surgery if you have a problem with the small intestine from a disease, injury, or birth defect. Whipple disease, a rare bacterial infection Genetic diseases Certain medicines Symptoms of different malabsorption syndromes can vary.  They often include chronic diarrhea, abnormal stools, weight loss, and gas. Your doctor may use lab, imaging, or other tests to make a diagnosis. Treatment of malabsorption syndromes depends on the cause.

Food provides the energy and nutrients you need to be healthy. If you don't get enough nutrients -- including proteins , carbohydrates , fats , vitamins , and minerals - you may suffer from malnutrition. Causes of malnutrition include: Lack of specific nutrients in your diet. Even the lack of one vitamin can lead to malnutrition. An unbalanced diet Certain medical problems, such as malabsorption syndromes and cancers Symptoms may include fatigue, dizziness, and weight loss.  Or, you may have no symptoms.  To diagnose the cause of the problem, your doctor may do blood tests and a nutritional assessment. Treatment may include replacing the missing nutrients and treating the underlying cause.

Minerals are important for your body to stay healthy. Your body uses minerals for many different jobs, including keeping your bones, muscles, heart, and brain working properly. Minerals are also important for making enzymes and hormones. There are two kinds of minerals: macrominerals and trace minerals. You need larger amounts of macrominerals. They include calcium , phosphorus, magnesium, sodium , potassium , chloride and sulfur. You only need small amounts of trace minerals. They include iron , manganese, copper, iodine, zinc, cobalt, fluoride and selenium. Most people get the amount of minerals they need by eating a wide variety of foods. In some cases, your doctor may recommend a mineral supplement. People who have certain health problems or take some medicines may need to get less of one of the minerals. For example, people with chronic kidney disease need to limit foods that are high in potassium.

Good nutrition is important in keeping people healthy throughout their lives - when they are babies , toddlers , children , adults, and then older adults . It can help people live longer and lower their risk of health problems like heart disease , type 2 diabetes , obesity , and more. Good nutrition is about healthy eating. This means regularly choosing healthy foods and beverages. A healthy eating plan should give your body the energy and nutrients that you need every day. Nutrients include proteins , carbohydrates , fats , vitamins , minerals , and water . The plan should also take into account your preferences, cultural traditions, and budget. Healthy eating does not mean that you have to follow a very strict diet or eat only a few specific types of food. It doesn't mean that you can never eat your favorite foods. You can eat a variety of foods, including less healthy favorites. But it's important not to eat too much of those foods or have them too often. You can balance those foods with healthier foods and regular physical activity . The keys to a healthy eating plan include: Eating a variety of foods, including vegetables, fruits, and whole-grain products Eating lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, and low-fat dairy products Getting enough fiber Drinking lots of water Limiting salt , added sugars, alcohol , and saturated fat Making sure that you get enough nutrients, especially calcium , vitamin D , and potassium Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Nutritional support is therapy for people who cannot get enough nourishment by eating or drinking.  You may need it if you : Can't swallow Have problems with your appetite Are severely malnourished Can't absorb nutrients through your digestive system You receive nutritional support through a needle or catheter placed in your vein or with a feeding tube, which goes into your stomach.

What is nutrition and why is it important for older adults? Nutrition is about eating a healthy and balanced diet so your body gets the nutrients that it needs. Nutrients are substances in foods that our bodies need so they can function and grow. They include carbohydrates , fats , proteins , vitamins , minerals , and water. Good nutrition is important, no matter what your age. It gives you energy and can help you control your weight. It may also help prevent some diseases, such as osteoporosis , high blood pressure , heart disease , type 2 diabetes , and certain cancers. But as you age, your body and life change, and so does what you need to stay healthy. For example, you may need fewer calories, but you still need to get enough nutrients. Some older adults need more protein. What can make it harder for me to eat healthy as I age? Some changes that can happen as you age can make it harder for you to eat healthy. These include changes in your: Home life, such as suddenly living alone or having trouble getting around Health, which can make it harder for you to cook or feed yourself Medicines, which can change how food tastes, make your mouth dry, or take away your appetite Income, which means that you may not have as much money for food Sense of smell and taste Problems chewing or swallowing your food How can I eat healthy as I age? To stay healthy as you age, you should: Eat foods that give you lots of nutrients without a lot of extra calories , such as Fruits and vegetables (choose different types with bright colors) Whole grains, like oatmeal, whole-wheat bread, and brown rice Fat-free or low-fat milk and cheese, or soy or rice milk that has added vitamin D and calcium Seafood, lean meats, poultry, and eggs Beans, nuts, and seeds Avoid empty calories. These are foods with lots of calories but few nutrients, such as chips, candy, baked goods, soda, and alcohol. Pick foods that are low in cholesterol and fat. You especially want to try to avoid saturated and trans fats. Saturated fats are usually fats that come from animals. Trans fats are processed fats in stick margarine and vegetable shortening. You may find them in some store-bought baked goods and fried foods at some fast-food restaurants. Drink enough liquids , so you don't get dehydrated . Some people lose their sense of thirst as they age. And certain medicines might make it even more important to have plenty of fluids. Be physically active. If you have started losing your appetite, exercising may help you to feel hungrier. What can I do if I am having trouble eating healthy? Sometimes health issues or other problems can make it hard to eat healthy. Here are some tips that might help: If you are tired of eating alone, try organizing some potluck meals or cooking with a friend. You can also look into having some meals at a nearby senior center, community center, or religious facility. If you are having trouble chewing, see your dentist to check for problems If you are having trouble swallowing, try drinking plenty of liquids with your meal. If that does not help, check with your health care provider. A health condition or medicine could be causing the problem. If you're having trouble smelling and tasting your food, try adding color and texture to make your food more interesting If you aren't eating enough, add some healthy snacks throughout the day to help you get more nutrients and calories If an illness is making it harder for you to cook or feed yourself, check with your health care provider. He or she may recommend an occupational therapist, who can help you find ways to make it easier. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Obesity means having too much body fat. It is different from being overweight, which means weighing too much.  The weight may come from muscle, bone, fat, and/or body water.  Both terms mean that a person's weight is greater than what's considered healthy for his or her height. Obesity happens over time when you eat more calories than you use. The balance between calories-in and calories-out differs for each person. Factors that might affect your weight include your genetic makeup, overeating, eating high-fat foods, and not being physically active. Obesity increases your risk of diabetes, heart disease, stroke, arthritis, and some cancers. If you have obesity, losing even 5 to 10% of your weight can delay or prevent some of these diseases. For example, that means losing 10 to 20 pounds if you weigh 200 pounds. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Obesity means having too much body fat. It is different from being overweight, which means weighing too much. Both terms mean that a person's weight is greater than what's considered healthy for his or her height.  Children grow at different rates, so it isn't always easy to know when a child has obesity or is overweight. Ask your health care provider to check whether your child's weight and height are in a healthy range. If a weight-loss program is necessary, involve the whole family in healthy habits so your child doesn't feel singled out.  Encourage healthy eating by: Serving more fruits and vegetables Buying fewer soft drinks and high-fat, high-calorie snack foods Making sure your child eats breakfast every day Eating fast food less often Not using food as a reward Physical activity is also very important. Kids need about 60 minutes each day. It does not have to happen all at once. Several short periods of activity during the day are just as good. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Potassium is a mineral that your body needs to work properly. It is a type of electrolyte . It helps your nerves to function and muscles to contract. It helps your heartbeat stay regular. It also helps move nutrients into cells and waste products out of cells. A diet rich in potassium helps to offset some of sodium's harmful effects on blood pressure. Many people get all the potassium they need from what they eat and drink. Sources of potassium in the diet include: Leafy greens, such as spinach and collards Fruit from vines, such as grapes and blackberries Root vegetables, such as carrots and potatoes Citrus fruits, such as oranges and grapefruit Your kidneys help to keep the right amount of potassium in your body. If you have chronic kidney disease , your kidneys may not remove extra potassium from the blood. Some medicines also can raise your potassium level. You may need a special diet to lower the amount of potassium that you eat.

What is nutrition, and why is it important during pregnancy? Nutrition is about eating a healthy and balanced diet so your body gets the nutrients that it needs. Nutrients are substances in foods that our bodies need so they can function and grow. They include carbohydrates , fats , proteins , vitamins , minerals , and water. When you're pregnant , nutrition is more important than ever. You need more of many important nutrients than you did before pregnancy. Making healthy food choices every day will help you give your baby what they need to develop . It will also help make sure that you and your baby gain a healthy amount of weight. Do I have any special nutritional needs now that I am pregnant? You need more folic acid, iron, calcium, and vitamin D than you did before pregnancy: Folic acid is a B vitamin that may help prevent neural tube defects . Before pregnancy, you need 400 mcg (micrograms) per day. During pregnancy and when breastfeeding, you need 600 mcg per day from foods and/or vitamins. It is hard to get this amount from foods alone, so you will most likely need to take a supplement that contains folic acid. Iron is important for your baby's growth and brain development. During pregnancy, the amount of blood in your body increases, so you need more iron for yourself and your growing baby. You should get 27 mg (milligrams) of iron a day. Calcium during pregnancy can reduce your risk of preeclampsia . It's a serious medical condition that causes a sudden increase in your blood pressure. Calcium also builds up your baby's bones and teeth. Pregnant adults should get 1,000 mg (milligrams) of calcium a day Pregnant teenagers (ages 14-18) need 1,300 mg of calcium a day Vitamin D helps the calcium to build your baby's bones and teeth. All women, pregnant or not, should be getting 600 IU (international units) of vitamin D per day. Keep in mind that taking too much of a supplement can be harmful. For example, very high levels of vitamin A can cause birth defects . Only take vitamins and mineral supplements that your health care provider recommends. You also need more protein when you are pregnant. Healthy sources of protein include beans, peas, eggs, lean meats, seafood, and unsalted nuts and seeds. Getting enough fluids is another special nutritional concern during pregnancy. When you are pregnant, your body needs even more water to stay hydrated and support the life inside you. So it's important to drink enough fluids every day. How much weight should I gain during my pregnancy? How much weight you should gain depends on your health and how much you weighed before pregnancy: If you were at a normal weight before pregnancy, you should gain about 25 to 35 pounds If you were underweight before pregnancy, you should gain more If you were overweight or had obesity before you became pregnant, you should gain less Check with your provider to find out how much weight gain during pregnancy is healthy for you. You should gain the weight gradually during your pregnancy, with most of the weight gained in the last trimester. Do I need to eat more calories when I am pregnant? How many calories you need depends on your weight gain goals. Your provider can tell you what your goal should be, based on things like your weight before pregnancy, your age, and how fast you gain weight. The general recommendations are: In the first trimester of pregnancy, you probably do not need extra calories In the second trimester, you usually need about 340 extra calories In the last trimester, you may need around 450 extra calories per day During the final weeks of pregnancy, you may not need extra calories Keep in mind that not all calories are equal. You should eat healthy foods that are packed with nutrients - not "empty calories" such as those found in soft drinks, candies, and desserts. What foods should I avoid during pregnancy? During pregnancy, you should avoid: Alcohol. There is no known amount of alcohol that is safe for a woman to drink during pregnancy . Fish that may have high levels of mercury. Limit white (albacore) tuna to 6 ounces per week. Do not eat tilefish, shark, swordfish, marlin, orange roughy, or king mackerel. Foods that are more likely to contain germs that could cause foodborne illness , including Refrigerated smoked seafood like whitefish, salmon, and mackerel Undercooked meat, poultry, eggs, and seafood Refrigerated meat spreads Store-made salads, such as chicken, egg, or tuna salad Unpasteurized or raw milk Unpasteurized juices or cider Unpasteurized soft cheeses, such as unpasteurized feta, Brie, queso blanco, queso fresco, and blue cheeses Raw sprouts of any kind (including alfalfa, clover, radish, and mung bean) Raw cookie dough Unwashed fruits and vegetables Too much caffeine . Drinking high amounts of caffeine may be harmful for your baby. For most people, it's best to limit caffeine to less than 200 mg per day during pregnancy. But first check with your provider about whether you should have caffeine at all.

Table salt is a combination of two minerals - sodium and chloride Your body needs some sodium to work properly. It helps with the function of nerves and muscles. It also helps to keep the right balance of fluids in your body. Your kidneys control how much sodium is in your body. If you have too much and your kidneys can't get rid it, sodium builds up in your blood. This can lead to high blood pressure . High blood pressure can lead to other health problems. Most people in the U.S. get more sodium in their diets than they need. A key to healthy eating is choosing foods low in sodium. The Dietary Guidelines recommend that most adults eat less than 2.3 grams per day. That equals about 1 teaspoon of table salt a day. Some people are more sensitive to the effects of salt than others and should eat less. This includes people who have high blood pressure, diabetes, or kidney problems, or are African American or over age 50. Reading food labels can help you see how much sodium is in prepared foods. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Food provides the energy and nutrients that young children need to be healthy. Toddlers are learning to feed themselves and to eat new foods.  They should eat a variety of foods from all of the food groups. Each day, toddlers need enough nutrients, including: 7 milligrams of iron 700 milligrams of calcium 600 IU of vitamin D

What are triglycerides? Triglycerides are a type of fat. They are the most common type of fat in your body. They come from foods, especially butter, oils, and other fats you eat. Triglycerides also come from extra calories. These are the calories that you eat, but your body does not need right away.
Your body changes these extra calories into triglycerides and stores them in fat cells. When your body needs energy, it releases the triglycerides. Your VLDL cholesterol particles carry the triglycerides to your tissues. Having a high level of triglycerides can raise your risk of heart diseases , such as coronary artery disease . What causes high triglycerides? Factors that can raise your triglyceride level include: Regularly eating more calories than you burn off, especially if you eat a lot of sugar Being overweight or having obesity Cigarette smoking Excessive alcohol use Certain medicines Some genetic disorders Thyroid diseases Poorly controlled type 2 diabetes Liver or kidney diseases How are high triglycerides diagnosed? There is a blood test that measures your triglycerides, along with your cholesterol. Triglyceride levels are measured in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL). The guidelines for triglyceride levels are Category Triglyceride Level Normal Less than 150mg/dL Borderline high 150 to 199 mg/dL High 200 to 499 mg/dL Very high 500 mg/dL and above Levels above 150mg/dl may raise your risk for heart disease. A triglyceride level of 150 mg/dL or higher is also a risk factor for metabolic syndrome . What are the treatments for high triglycerides? You may be able to lower your triglyceride levels with lifestyle changes: Controlling your weight Regular physical activity Not smoking Limiting sugar and refined foods Limiting alcohol Switching from saturated fats to healthier fats Some people will also need to take cholesterol medicines to lower their triglycerides.

A vegetarian diet focuses on plants for food. These include fruits, vegetables, dried 
beans and peas, grains, seeds and nuts. There is no single type of vegetarian diet. 
Instead, vegetarian eating patterns usually fall into the following groups: The vegan diet, which excludes all meat and animal products The lacto vegetarian diet, which includes plant foods plus dairy products The lacto-ovo vegetarian diet, which includes both dairy products and eggs People who follow vegetarian diets can get all the nutrients they need. However, they 
must be careful to eat a wide variety of foods to meet their nutritional needs. Nutrients 
vegetarians may need to focus on include protein , iron , calcium , zinc and vitamin B12 . United States Department of Agriculture

Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin A plays a role in your: Vision Bone growth Reproduction Cell functions Immune system Vitamin A is an antioxidant . It can come from plant or animal sources.  Plant sources include colorful fruits and vegetables.  Animal sources include liver and whole milk.  Vitamin A is also added to foods like cereals. Vegetarians, young children, and alcoholics may need extra Vitamin A. You might also need more if you have certain conditions, such as liver diseases, cystic fibrosis, and Crohn's disease.  Check with your health care provider to see if you need to take vitamin A supplements. NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin C is an antioxidant . It is important for your skin, bones, and connective tissue.  It promotes healing and helps the body absorb iron. Vitamin C comes from fruits and vegetables.  Good sources include citrus, red and green peppers, tomatoes, broccoli, and greens. Some juices and cereals have added vitamin C. Some people may need extra vitamin C: Pregnant/breastfeeding women Smokers People recovering from surgery Burn victims

Why do I need vitamin D? Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin D is important to your body because: It helps your body absorb calcium . Calcium is one of the main building blocks of bone. A lack of vitamin D can lead to bone diseases such as osteoporosis or rickets . It also has a role in your nerve, muscle, and immune systems: Your muscles need it to move Your nerves need it to carry messages between your brain and your body Your immune system needs vitamin D to fight off bacteria and viruses How do I get vitamin D? You can get vitamin D in three ways: through your skin, from your diet, and from supplements. Your body forms vitamin D naturally after exposure to sunlight . However, too much sun exposure can lead to skin aging and skin cancer . So many people try to get their vitamin D from other sources. Very few foods naturally contain vitamin D. Most people get vitamin D in their diet from foods that are fortified. This means that vitamin D is added to the food. These foods may include milk, cereal, and yogurt. Foods that naturally have vitamin D include egg yolks, saltwater fish, and liver. Vitamin D is available in supplements. It is also included in many multivitamins. The two forms of vitamin D in supplements are D2 and D3. Both types increase vitamin D in your blood, but D3 might raise it higher and for longer than D2. Vitamin D is fat soluble. You can absorb it better when you take your supplements with a meal or snack that includes some fat. How much vitamin D do I need? The amount of vitamin D you need each day depends on your age. The recommended amounts, in international units (IU), are: Birth to 12 months: 400 IU Children 1-13 years: 600 IU Teens 14-18 years: 600 IU Adults 19-70 years: 600 IU Adults 71 years and older: 800 IU People who are pregnant or breastfeeding: 600 IU But certain people may need extra vitamin D, such as: Older adults Breastfed infants People with dark skin People with  certain conditions that limit the absorption of fat, such as Crohn's disease , celiac disease , and ulcerative colitis People who have obesity or have had gastric bypass surgery Check with your health care provider to see if you need to take vitamin D supplements, and if so, how much you should take. Your provider may want to first do a vitamin D test to see if you are getting enough of it. NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

What is vitamin D deficiency? Vitamin D deficiency means that your body is not getting enough vitamin D to stay healthy. Why do I need vitamin D and how do I get it? Vitamin D helps your body absorb calcium . Calcium is one of the main building blocks of bone. Vitamin D also has a role in your nervous, muscle, and immune systems. You can get vitamin D in three ways: through your skin, from your diet, and from supplements. Your body forms vitamin D naturally after exposure to sunlight. But too much sun exposure can lead to skin aging and skin cancer, so many people try to get their vitamin D from other sources. How much vitamin D do I need? The amount of vitamin D you need each day depends on your age.  The recommended amounts, in international units (IU), are: Birth to 12 months: 400 IU Children 1-13 years: 600 IU Teens 14-18 years: 600 IU Adults 19-70 years: 600 IU Adults 71 years and older: 800 IU Pregnant and breastfeeding women: 600 IU People at high risk of vitamin D deficiency may need more. Check with your health care provider about how much you need. What causes vitamin D deficiency? You can become deficient in vitamin D for different reasons: You don't get enough vitamin D in your diet You don't absorb enough vitamin D from food (a malabsorption problem ) You don't get enough exposure to sunlight Your liver or kidneys cannot convert vitamin D to its active form in the body You take medicines that interfere with your body's ability to convert or absorb vitamin D Who is at risk of vitamin D deficiency? Some people are at higher risk of vitamin D deficiency: Breastfed infants, because human milk is a poor source of vitamin D. If you are breastfeeding , give your infant a supplement of 400 IU of vitamin D every day. Older adults, because your skin doesn't make vitamin D when exposed to sunlight as efficiently as when you were young, and your kidneys are less able to convert vitamin D to its active form. People with dark skin, which has less ability to produce vitamin D from the sun. People with conditions that make it difficult to absorb nutrients from food, such as Crohn's disease , ulcerative colitis , and celiac disease . People who have obesity , because their body fat binds to some vitamin D and prevents it from getting into the blood. People who have had gastric bypass surgery, a type of weight loss surgery which creates a bypass of part of the small intestine. Since vitamin D is absorbed there, bypassing part of it makes it harder to absorb enough vitamin D. People with chronic kidney or liver disease , which can affect your ability to change vitamin D into a form your body can use. People who take medicines that affect vitamin D levels, including certain cholesterol , anti-seizure, steroid , and weight-loss medicines. Talk with your provider if you are at risk for vitamin D deficiency.  There is a blood test that can measure how much vitamin D is in your body. What problems does vitamin D deficiency cause? Vitamin D deficiency can lead to a loss of bone density , which can contribute to osteoporosis and fractures (broken bones). Severe vitamin D deficiency can also lead to other diseases: In children, it can cause rickets . Rickets is a rare disease that causes the bones to become soft and bend. African American infants and children are at higher risk of getting rickets. In adults, severe vitamin D deficiency leads to osteomalacia. Osteomalacia causes weak bones, bone pain, and muscle weakness. How can I get more vitamin D? There are a few foods that naturally have some vitamin D: Fatty fish such as salmon, tuna, and mackerel Beef liver Cheese Mushrooms Egg yolks You can also get vitamin D from fortified foods. You can check the food labels to find out whether a food has vitamin D. Foods that often have added vitamin D include: Milk Breakfast cereals Orange juice Other dairy products, such as yogurt Soy drinks Vitamin D is in many multivitamins. There are also vitamin D supplements, both in pills and in a liquid for babies. If you have vitamin D deficiency, the treatment is with supplements. Check with your provider about how much you need to take, how often you need to take it, and how long you need to take it. Can too much vitamin D be harmful? Getting too much vitamin D (known as vitamin D toxicity) can be harmful. Signs of toxicity include nausea and vomiting , poor appetite, constipation , weakness, and weight loss. Very high levels of vitamin D can damage the kidneys. It also raises the level of calcium in your blood. High levels of blood calcium (hypercalcemia) can cause confusion, kidney failure , and irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia). Most cases of vitamin D toxicity happen when someone overuses vitamin D supplements. You cannot get too much vitamin D from sun exposure because the skin limits the amount of vitamin D it makes.

Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin E is an antioxidant . It plays a role in your immune system and metabolic processes. Good sources of vitamin E include: Vegetable oils Margarine Nuts and seeds Leafy greens Vitamin E is also added to foods like cereals. Most people get enough vitamin E from the foods they eat. People with certain disorders, such as liver diseases, cystic fibrosis, and Crohn's disease may need extra vitamin E. Vitamin E supplements may be harmful for people who take blood thinners and other medicines. Check with your health care provider before taking the supplements. NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin K helps your body by making proteins for healthy bones and tissues.  It also makes proteins for blood clotting.  If you don't have enough vitamin K, you may bleed too much. Newborns have very little vitamin K.  They usually get a shot of vitamin K soon after they are born. If you take blood thinners , you need to be careful about how much vitamin K you get.  You also need to be careful about taking vitamin E supplements. Vitamin E can interfere with how vitamin K works in your body.  Ask your health care provider for recommendations about these vitamins. There are different types of vitamin K. Most people get vitamin K from plants such as green vegetables, and dark berries.   Bacteria in your intestines also produce small amounts of another type of vitamin K.

Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. There are 13 vitamins your body needs. They are: Vitamin A B vitamins (thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic acid, biotin, vitamin B-6, vitamin B-12 and folate ) Vitamin C Vitamin D Vitamin E Vitamin K You can usually get all your vitamins from the foods you eat. Your body can also make vitamins D and K. People who eat a vegetarian diet may need to take a vitamin B12 supplement. Each vitamin has specific jobs. If you have low levels of certain vitamins, you may  get health problems. For example, if you don't get enough vitamin C, you could become anemic. Some vitamins may help prevent medical problems. Vitamin A prevents night blindness. The best way to get enough vitamins is to eat a balanced diet with a variety of foods. In some cases, you may need to take vitamin supplements.  It's a good idea to ask your health care provider first.  High doses of some vitamins can cause problems.

What is cholesterol? Cholesterol is a waxy, fat-like substance that's found in all the cells in your body. Your liver makes cholesterol, and it is also in some foods, such as meat and dairy products. Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly. But having too much cholesterol in your blood raises your risk of coronary artery disease . What is VLDL cholesterol? VLDL stands for very-low-density lipoprotein. Your liver makes VLDL and releases it into your bloodstream. The VLDL particles mainly carry triglycerides , another type of fat, to your tissues. VLDL is similar to LDL cholesterol , but LDL mainly carries cholesterol to your tissues instead of triglycerides. VLDL and LDL are sometimes called "bad" cholesterols because they can contribute to the buildup of plaque in your arteries. This buildup is called atherosclerosis . The plaque that builds up is a sticky substance made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, and other substances found in the blood. Over time, the plaque hardens and narrows your arteries. This limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your body. It can lead to coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . How do I know what my VLDL level is? There isn't a way to directly measure your VLDL level. Instead, you will most likely get a blood test to measure your triglyceride level. The lab can use your triglyceride level to estimate what your VLDL level is. Your VLDL is about one-fifth of your triglyceride level. However, estimating your VLDL this way does not work if your triglyceride level is very high. What should my VLDL level be? Your VLDL level should be less than 30 mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter). Anything higher than that puts you at risk for heart disease and stroke . How can I lower my VLDL level? Since VLDL and triglycerides are linked, you can lower VLDL level by lowering your triglyceride level. You may be able to lower your triglycerides with a combination of losing weight, diet, and exercise. It is important to switch to healthy fats, and cut back on sugar and alcohol. Some people may also need to take medicines.

Why is weight control important? If you are struggling with your weight, you are not alone. In the United States, more than 70 percent of adults are overweight or have obesity . Having this extra weight raises your risk for many health conditions, such as type 2 diabetes , heart disease , kidney disease , and certain cancers. Reaching and staying at a healthy weight can be challenging. But a having a healthy lifestyle, including healthy eating patterns and regular physical activity, can help you lose weight. It can also lower your chance of developing weight-related health conditions. What factors affect weight and health? You gain weight when you take in more calories (through food and drinks) than you use up from physical activity and daily living. But there are many different factors that can affect weight gain, such as: The world around you. Your home, community, and workplace all may affect how you make daily lifestyle choices. For example: It is often easier to find food and beverages high in calories, sugar, and fat . For instance, vending machines, cafeterias, and special events may not offer healthy, lower calorie options. Less healthy foods may be cheaper than healthier foods. Many people are getting less physical activity because they are spending more time using smartphones and other devices. Families. Overweight and obesity tend to run in families. Overweight and obesity tend to run in families. This suggests that genes may play a role in weight gain. Families may also share eating and lifestyle habits. For example, some families may often have foods and drinks that are high in calories, sugar, and fat. And some families may tend to be less active and spend more time doing things like sitting and watching TV or using computers. Not enough sleep. People who don't get enough sleep may eat more calories and snack more. Emotions. Some people eat when they feel bored, sad, or stressed, even if they are not hungry. Medicines and health conditions. Taking certain medicines, such as steroids and certain antidepressants , can lead to weight gain. Some chronic health problems can also cause you to gain weight. A few examples are Cushing's syndrome and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). How can I get to and stay at a healthy weight? Getting to and staying at a healthy weight involves finding a balance of food and activity. To lose weight, you need to take in fewer calories than you use up. Some ways to do this are: Eating more nutrient-rich foods, such as foods with lots of vitamins , minerals , and fiber . Eating and drinking less of the foods and beverages that have lots of calories, salt , sugar, and fat. Limiting alcohol . Finding healthier ways to cook, such as using healthier oils to cook with and baking or grilling instead of frying foods. Getting more physical activity . The general recommendation is for adults to get 150 minutes of physical activity each week, including: Aerobic activity, which is also called cardio. It uses your large muscle groups (chest, legs, and back) to speed up your heart rate and breathing. Muscle-strengthening activity, which is also called strength training. It works your muscles by making you push or pull against something. You may decide to do these lifestyle changes on your own, or you may decide to try a weight-loss diet or program. Before you start, it's important to check with your health care provider first. Your provider can tell you what a healthy weight is for you, help you set goals, and give you tips on how to lose weight. If making lifestyle changes or doing a weight-loss program are not enough to help you lose weight, your provider may prescribe medicines. The prescription medicines to treat overweight and obesity work in different ways. Some may help you feel less hungry or full sooner. Others may make it harder for your body to absorb fat from the foods you eat. Another treatment is weight loss surgery . Your provider may recommend the surgery if you have severe obesity or serious obesity-related health problems and you have not been able to lose enough weight. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Assisted living is housing and services for people who need some help with daily care. They may need help with things like dressing, bathing, taking their medicines, and cleaning. But they do not need the medical care that a nursing home provides. Assisted living allows the residents to live more independently. Assisted living facilities sometimes have other names, such as adult care facilities or residential care facilities. They vary in size, with as few as 25 residents up to 120 residents or more. The residents usually live in their own apartments or rooms and share common areas. The facilities usually offer a few different levels of care. Residents pay more for the higher levels of care. The types of services they offer may be different from state to state. The services may include: Up to three meals a day Assistance with personal care, such as bathing, dressing, eating, getting in and out of bed or chairs, moving around, and using the bathroom Help with medicines Housekeeping Laundry 24-hour supervision, security, and on-site staff Social and recreational activities Transportation The residents are usually older adults, including those with Alzheimer's or other types of dementia . But in some cases, residents may be younger and have mental illnesses , developmental disabilities , or certain medical conditions. NIH: National Institute on Aging

A caregiver gives care to someone who needs help taking care of themselves. The person who needs help may be a child, an adult, or an older adult. They may need help because of an injury or disability .  Or they may have a chronic illness such as Alzheimer's disease or cancer. Some caregivers are informal caregivers. They are usually family members or friends. Other caregivers are paid professionals. Caregivers may give care at home or in a hospital or other health care setting. Sometimes they are caregiving from a distance. The types of tasks that caregivers do may include: Helping with daily tasks like bathing, eating, or taking medicine Doing housework and cooking Running errands such as shopping for food and clothes Driving the person to appointments Providing company and emotional support Arranging activities and medical care Making health and financial decisions Caregiving can be rewarding. It may help to strengthen connections to a loved one. You may feel fulfillment from helping someone else. But caregiving may also be stressful and sometimes even overwhelming. You may be "on call" for 24 hours a day. You may also be working outside the home and taking care of children. So you need to make sure that you are not ignoring your own needs. You have to take care of your own physical and mental health as well. Because when you feel better, you can take better care of your loved one. It will also be easier to focus on the rewards of caregiving. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

We all want high-quality health care, but it's hard to know how to choose. There are many things to consider, including: What your insurance covers Whether a health care provider or service is accredited The location of a service Hours that the service is available Whether you like a health care provider's personality On this page you'll find information to help you choose a health care provider or service.

If you get very sick or badly hurt and need help right away, you should use emergency medical services. These services use specially trained people and specially equipped facilities. You may need care in the hospital emergency room (ER).  Doctors and nurses there treat emergencies, such as heart attacks and injuries. For some emergencies, you need help where you are. Emergency medical technicians, or EMTs, do specific rescue jobs. They answer emergency calls and give basic medical care. Some EMTs are paramedics - they have training to do medical procedures on site. They usually take you to the ER for more care. If you or someone you know needs emergency care, go to your hospital's emergency room. If you think the problem is life-threatening, call 911.

Health care can be costly. If you have health insurance , it usually pays at least part of your medical costs. If you don't have insurance or need help with costs that aren't covered, financial assistance might 
be available. Certain government programs and nonprofit organizations can help. You can also discuss 
concerns about paying your medical bills with your health care provider, social worker or the business 
office of your clinic or hospital.

The spread of a disease doesn't stop at a country's borders. With more people living in crowded cities and traveling to other countries, it's easier for germs to spread. Infectious diseases that start in one part of the world can quickly reach another part of the world. Some of the major diseases currently affecting countries around the globe include HIV , malaria , COVID-19 , and tuberculosis . Besides the spread of diseases, there are other global health challenges. Resistance to medicines such as antibiotics is on the rise. That makes it harder to treat certain diseases. Natural and man-made disasters create refugee populations with immediate and long-term health problems. Climate change and not enough access to food and safe water are also global problems which can affect people's health. Many countries and health organizations are working together and sharing information on these and other health issues.

Health disparities are health differences between different groups of people. These health differences may include: How many people get certain diseases How severe the diseases are How many people have complications because of the diseases How many people die from a disease Whether people can get health care How many people get screened for a disease These groups of people may be based on: Race Ethnicity Immigrant status Disability Sex or gender Sexual orientation Geography Income Level of education NIH: National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities

Health facilities are places that provide health care. They include hospitals, clinics, outpatient care centers, and specialized care centers, such as birthing centers and psychiatric care centers. When you choose a health facility, you might want to consider: How close it is to where you live or work Whether your health insurance will pay for services there Whether your health care provider can treat you there The quality of the facility Quality is important.  Some facilities do a better job than others. One way to learn about the quality of a facility is to look at report cards developed by federal, state, and consumer groups.

Health fraud scams involve selling medicines, supplements , devices, foods, or cosmetics that have not been proven effective. At best, these scams don't work. At worst, they're dangerous. They also waste money and might keep you from getting the treatment you really need. Some of the possible dangers of scam products are that they could: Be contaminated from being made in unclean facilities or without proper quality control Contain harmful ingredients that are not listed on the label Trigger a harmful interaction with medicines you are taking Cause serious, even life-threatening, injuries Health fraud scams can be found everywhere, promising help for many common health issues, including weight loss, memory loss, sexual performance, and joint pain. They target people with serious conditions such as cancer , diabetes , heart disease , HIV , and Alzheimer's disease . Just remember - if it sounds too good to be true, it's probably a scam. Some red flags to watch for are product claims that: Have personal testimonials by "real" people or "doctors" played by actors claiming amazing results. Say that the product can treat or cure a wide range of unrelated diseases. No one product can treat or cure many different illnesses. Mention conspiracy theories like "This is the cure our government and Big Pharma don't want you to know about." Include phrases such as: Ancient remedy Miracle cure No-risk money back guarantee Natural cure Quick fix Secret ingredient Scientific breakthrough Use scientific-sounding terms that don't make sense for the products, such as "molecule multiplicity." Refer to prestigious prizes, for example "Nobel Prize winning technology." Before taking an unproven or little-known product, talk to your health care provider, especially if you are taking any prescription medicines. Food and Drug Administration

Health insurance helps protect you from high medical care costs. It is a contract between you and your insurance company. You buy a plan or policy, and the company agrees to pay part of your expenses when you need medical care. Many people in the United States get a health insurance policy through their employers. In most cases, the employer helps pay for that insurance. Insurance through employers is often with a managed care plan. These plans contract with health care providers and medical facilities to provide care for members at reduced costs. You can also purchase health insurance on your own. People who meet certain requirements can qualify for government health insurance, such as Medicare and Medicaid . The Affordable Care Act expands health insurance coverage for many people in the U.S.

Every day, around the clock, people who work in the health care industry provide care for millions of people, from newborns to the very ill. In fact, the health care industry is one of largest providers of jobs in the United States. Many health jobs are in hospitals. Others are in nursing homes, doctors' offices, dentists' offices, outpatient clinics and laboratories. To work in a health occupation, you often must have special training.  Some, like doctors, must have more than 4 years of college. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Health statistics are numbers that summarize information related to health. Researchers and experts from government, private, and non-profit agencies and organizations collect health statistics. They use the statistics to learn about public health and health care. Some of the types of statistics include: How many people in the country have a disease or how many people got the disease within a certain period of time How many people of a certain group have a disease. The groups could be based on location, race, ethnic group, sex, age, profession, income level, level of education. This can help identify health disparities . Whether a treatment is safe and effective How many people were born and died. These are known as vital statistics. How many people have access to and use health care The quality and efficiency of our health care system Health care costs, including how much the government, employers, and individuals pay for health care. It could include how poor health can affect the country economically The impact of government programs and policies on health Risk factors for different diseases. An example would be how air pollution can raise your risk of lung diseases Ways to lower risk for diseases, such as exercise and weight loss to lower the risk of getting type 2 diabetes Numbers on a graph or in a chart may seem straightforward, but that's not always the case. It's important to be critical and consider the source. If needed, ask questions to help you understand the statistics and what they are showing.

Home care is care that allows a person with special needs to stay in their home. It might be for people who are getting older (aging in place). It could also be for people who are chronically ill, recovering from surgery, or have a disability . Home care services include: Personal care, such as help with bathing, washing your hair, or getting dressed Household chores, such as cleaning, yard work, and laundry Cooking for you in your home or delivering meals to you Money management, such as help filling out forms and making sure that your bills are paid on time Health care, such as having a home health aide come to your home or getting care from your provider through telehealth You can get almost any type of help you want in your home. You have to pay for many of them. But some types of care and community services are free or donated. Sometimes government programs or your health insurance will help cover the cost of certain home care services. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Hospice care is end-of-life care. A team of health care professionals and volunteers provides it. They give medical, psychological, and spiritual support. The goal of the care is to help people who are dying have peace, comfort, and dignity. The caregivers try to control pain and other symptoms so a person can remain as alert and comfortable as possible. Hospice programs also provide services to support a patient's family. Usually, a hospice patient is expected to live 6 months or less. Hospice care can take place: At home At a hospice center In a hospital In a skilled nursing facility NIH: National Cancer Institute

Managed care plans are a type of health insurance . They have contracts with health care providers and medical facilities to provide care for members at reduced costs. These providers make up the plan's network. How much of your care the plan will pay for depends on the network's rules. Plans that restrict your choices usually cost you less. If you want a flexible plan, it will probably cost more. There are three types of managed care plans: Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO) usually only pay for care within the network. You choose a primary care doctor who coordinates most of your care. Preferred Provider Organizations (PPO) usually pay more if you get care within the network. They still pay part of the cost if you go outside the network. Point of Service (POS) plans let you choose between an HMO or a PPO each time you need care.

Medicaid is government health insurance that helps many low-income people in the United States to pay their medical bills . The Federal government sets up general guidelines for the program, but each state has its own rules. Your state might require you to pay a part of the cost for some medical services. You have to meet certain requirements to get Medicaid help. These might involve: Your age Whether you are pregnant, blind, or have a disability Your income and resources Whether or not you are a U.S. citizen or, if not, what your immigration status is Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services

The field of ethics studies principles of right and wrong. There is hardly an area in medicine that doesn't have an ethical aspect. For example, there are ethical issues relating to
: End of life care : Should a patient receive nutrition ? What about advance directives and resuscitation orders? Abortion : When does life begin? Is it ethical to terminate a pregnancy with a birth defect? Genetic and prenatal testing: What happens if you are a carrier of a defect? What if testing shows that your unborn baby has a defect? Birth control : Should it be available to minors? Is it ethical to harvest embryonic stem cells to treat diseases? Organ donation : Must a relative donate an organ to a sick relative? Your personal health information: who has access to your records ? Patient rights : Do you have the right to refuse treatment? When you talk with your doctor , is it ethical for her to withhold information from you or your family?

Medicare is the U.S. government's health insurance program for people age 65 or older. Some people under age 65 can qualify for Medicare, too. They include those with disabilities, permanent kidney failure, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Medicare helps with the cost of health care. It does not cover all medical expenses or the cost of most long-term care. The program has four parts: Part A is hospital insurance Part B helps pay for medical services that Part A doesn't cover Part C is called Medicare Advantage. If you have Parts A and B, you can choose this option to receive all of your health care through a provider organization, like an HMO. Part D is prescription drug coverage. It helps pay for some medicines.

A nursing home is a place for people who don't need to be in a hospital but can't be cared for at home. Most nursing homes have nursing aides and skilled nurses on hand 24 hours a day. Some nursing homes are set up like a hospital. The staff provides medical care, as well as physical, speech and occupational therapy. There might be a nurses' station on each floor. Other nursing homes try to be more like home. They try to have a neighborhood feel. Often, they don't have a fixed day-to-day schedule, and kitchens might be open to residents. Staff members are encouraged to develop relationships with residents. Some nursing homes have special care units for people with serious memory problems such as Alzheimer's disease . Some will let couples live together. Nursing homes are not only for older adults, but for anyone who requires 24-hour care. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Health care workers are exposed to many job hazards. These can include : Infections Needle injuries Back injuries Allergy-causing substances Violence Stress Follow good job safety and injury prevention practices. They can reduce your risk of health problems. Use protective equipment, follow infection control guidelines, learn the right way to lift heavy objects, and find ways to manage stress. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health

Palliative care is treatment of the discomfort, symptoms, and stress of serious illness.  It provides relief from distressing symptoms including: Pain Shortness of breath Fatigue Constipation Nausea Loss of appetite Problems with sleep It can also help you deal with the side effects of the medical treatments you're receiving. Hospice care , care at the end of life, always includes palliative care.  But you may receive palliative care at any stage of an illness.  The goal is to make you comfortable and improve your quality of life. NIH: National Institute of Nursing Research

What are patient rights? As a patient, you have certain rights. Some are guaranteed by federal law, such as the right to get a copy of your medical records and the right to keep them private and secure. Many states have additional laws protecting patients. And some states, insurance plans, medical organizations, and health care facilities have their own patient bill of rights. Some other examples of patient rights include: Being treated with respect Not being discriminated against in your medical care The right to refuse treatment The right of informed consent What is informed consent? Informed consent is an important patient right. It is a process in which your health care provider gives you the information you need to make decisions about your care. The types of care could be treatments, procedures, genetic testing, or clinical trials. The information should include the risks and benefits of the care, as well as details about your medical condition. It's important that you understand everything before you give consent. Sometimes your provider will ask you to sign a form to give your consent. This is called written consent. You have the right to change your mind about consent at any time. Where can I get help with patient rights? There are different resources that can help you if you have a problem with your patient rights: Many hospitals have patient advocates. These are people who can help guide you through the health care system and make sure that your rights are protected. Your state may have resources to help you, such as: Your state may have an office (called an ombudsmen office) for problems with long term care. Your state's department of health may be able to help. States also have oversight agencies for insurance companies and various types of health care facilities and providers. These agencies make sure that these organizations and providers follow the rules so you can get quality care. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has an Office for Civil Rights (OCR). You can file a complaint with them if you feel you have been discriminated against in your medical care or if you think your health information privacy rights have been violated.

You can help prevent medical errors by being an active member of your health care team. Research shows that patients who are more involved with their care tend to get better results.  To reduce the risk of medical errors, you can: Ask questions if you have doubts or concerns. Take a relative or friend to your doctor appointment to help you ask questions and understand answers. Make sure you understand what will happen if you need surgery Tell your health care providers about all the medicines you take, including over-the-counter drugs and dietary supplements. Tell them if you have any allergies or bad reactions to anesthesia. Make sure you know how to take your medications correctly . Get a second opinion about treatment options Keep a copy of your own medical history Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

You've probably seen your chart at your doctor's office. In fact, you may have charts at several doctors' offices.  If you've been in the hospital, you have a chart there, too. These charts are your medical records. They may be on paper or electronic. To keep track of all this information, it's a good idea to keep your own personal health record. What kind of information would you put in a personal health record? You could start with: Your name, birth date, blood type, and emergency contact information Date of last physical Dates and results of tests and screenings Major illnesses and surgeries, with dates A list of your medicines and supplements, the dosages, and how long you've taken them Any allergies Any chronic diseases Any history of illnesses in your family

Around 15% of people in the United States live in rural areas. There are many different reasons why you might choose to live in a rural community. You may want a lower cost of living and a slower pace of life. You may enjoy having access to big, open spaces for recreation. Rural areas are less crowded and can offer more privacy. You may choose a rural area so that you can live near your family and friends. But there are also challenges to living in a rural area, including when it comes to taking care of your health.  Compared to urban areas, rural communities tend to have: Higher poverty rates. A higher percentage of older adults, who are more likely to have chronic health problems. More residents without health insurance. Less access to health care. For example, clinics and hospitals may be far away. Higher rates of certain substance use, such as cigarette smoking and opioid and methamphetamine misuse. Higher rates of chronic health problems such as high blood pressure and obesity . More exposure to environmental hazards, such as chemicals used for farming. There are solutions to deal with these problems. A few examples include: Clinics offering telehealth to provide care for people who live far away from specialists or can't easily get to their providers' offices. Local public health agencies working with their communities to promote healthy living. They can provide wellness and exercise classes and start a farmer's market. Local governments adding bike lanes and trails to encourage people to bike and walk. Rural schools can offer counseling and mental health services for their students.

How well you and your doctor or provider communicate with each other is one of the most important parts of getting good health care. Being prepared can help you make the most of your visit, whether it is in person or through telehealth . Here are some things you can do to make the most of your appointment: Make lists of any allergies you have and all the medicines, herbs , vitamins , and supplements you take. Make a list of the questions and concerns you want to talk about. If you are having any health problems, write down a description of your symptoms. Include information such as when they started, what makes them better, and what makes them worse. Ask a trusted friend or family member to come to the appointment with you. If your doctor or provider doesn't speak your language, call their office ahead of time and ask them to provide an interpreter. During your appointment, take notes about what your doctor or health care provider tells you. Or you could ask your friend or family member to take notes for you. Be honest during your appointment. Don't just say what you think your doctor or provider wants to hear. For example, don't say that you stopped smoking or are eating healthy if it's not true. Your doctor or provider needs to know what is really going on, so they can give you the care and treatments that would be best for you. If you don't understand something your doctor or provider says, ask questions until you do understand. Ask for written instructions if you need them. Learn how to access your medical records, so you can keep track of your test results, diagnoses, treatment plans, and medicines. Ask for your doctor's or provider's contact information and find out the best way to communicate with them. Find out what to do if you need more information later.

What is telehealth? Telehealth is the use of communications technologies to provide health care from a distance. These technologies may include computers, cameras, videoconferencing, the Internet, and satellite and wireless communications. Some examples of telehealth include: A "virtual visit" with a health care provider, through a phone call or video chat Remote patient monitoring, which lets your provider check on you while you are at home. For example, you might wear a device that measures your heart rate and sends that information to your provider. A surgeon using robotic technology to do surgery from a different location Sensors that can alert caregivers if a person with dementia leaves the house Sending your provider a message through your electronic health record (EHR) Watching an online video that your provider sent you about how to use an inhaler Getting an email, phone, or text reminder that it's time for a cancer screening What is the difference between telemedicine and telehealth? Sometimes people use the term telemedicine to mean the same thing as telehealth. Telehealth is a broader term. It includes telemedicine. But it also includes things like training for health care providers, health care administrative meetings, and services provided by pharmacists and social workers. What are the benefits of telehealth? Some of the benefits of telehealth include: Getting care at home, especially for people who can't easily get to their providers' offices Getting care from a specialist who is not close by Getting care after office hours More communication with your providers Better communication and coordination between health care providers More support for people who are managing their health conditions, especially chronic conditions such as diabetes Lower cost, since virtual visits may be cheaper than in-person visits What are the problems with telehealth? Some of the problems with telehealth include: If your virtual visit is with someone who is not your regular provider, he or she may not have all of your medical history After a virtual visit, it may be up to you to coordinate your care with your regular provider In some cases, the provider may not be able to make the right diagnosis without examining you in person. Or your provider may need you to come in for a lab test. There may be problems with the technology, for example, if you lose the connection, there is a problem with the software, etc. Some insurance companies may not cover telehealth visits What types of care can I get using telehealth? The types of care that you can get using telehealth may include: General health care, like wellness visits Prescriptions for medicine Dermatology (skin care) Eye exams Nutrition counseling Mental health counseling Urgent care conditions, such as sinusitis , urinary tract infections , common rashes , etc. For telehealth visits, just like with an in-person visit, it is important to be prepared and have good communication with the provider .

Military service members and veterans have made sacrifices to our country, and they may face lots of different health issues. Some of the most common health problems they may have include chronic pain , sleep disorders , and mental health disorders . But they may also face some different health risks than civilians. Serving to protect our country is a special job, and along with it comes some special risks and job hazards. These include different types of injuries and health problems from exposures. What types of injuries do service members face? During their service, members are at risk for various injuries. These injuries can happen during training or while in combat. Sometimes the injuries are life-threatening or serious enough to cause disability . Others may not be as serious, but they may be painful and can affect daily life. Some of the specific types of injuries that service members may face include: Sprains and strains , especially in the ankles and knees . These injuries are often caused by exercise and running. Back and shoulder injuries, often from lifting and carrying. Tinnitus and hearing loss , typically from exposure to noise . Head injuries and traumatic brain injuries (TBIs). Shrapnel and gunshot wounds. Lost limbs . What other special health problems do service members face? There may also be a risk of health problems from exposure to environmental hazards, such as contaminated water, chemicals, infections, and burn pits. Sometimes the health problems caused by exposures don't develop until years later. Some service members experience military sexual trauma (MST). This includes sexual assault and sexual harassment. What mental health issues do service members and veterans face? Being in combat and being separated from your family can be stressful. So can readjusting to civilian life after the military. All of this stress can put service members and veterans at risk for mental health problems, including: Depression Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Anxiety Alcohol and drug use disorders There is also a risk of suicide . Veterans who are in crisis can get help from the Veteran's Crisis line by: Calling 988 and then pressing 1 Texting to 838255 Chatting with them online What health care services are available to service members and veterans? There are health care services especially for service members and veterans through: TRICARE, which is the Department of Defense's health care program. It has insurance plans and other services for uniformed service members, retirees, and their families around the world. The Veterans Health Administration, which is part of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). It provides medical and social support services to eligible veterans. The VA 's expanded health care and benefits for veterans exposed to burn pits, Agent Orange, and other toxic substances. To better understand and treat the health needs of veterans in the future, the VA created the Million Veteran Program (MVP). This research program is looking at how genes, lifestyle, military experiences, and exposures affect health and wellness in veterans.

What kind of medical care would you want if you were too ill or hurt to express your wishes? Advance directives are legal documents that allow you to spell out your decisions about end-of-life care ahead of time. They give you a way to tell your wishes to family, friends, and health care professionals and to avoid confusion later on. A living will tells which treatments you want if you are dying or permanently unconscious. You can accept or refuse medical care. You might want to include instructions on: The use of dialysis and breathing machines If you want to be resuscitated if your breathing or heartbeat stops Tube feeding Organ or tissue donation A durable power of attorney for health care is a document that names your health care proxy. Your proxy is someone you trust to make health decisions for you if you are unable to do so. NIH: National Cancer Institute

We all want high-quality health care, but it's hard to know how to choose. There are many things to consider, including: What your insurance covers Whether a health care provider or service is accredited The location of a service Hours that the service is available Whether you like a health care provider's personality On this page you'll find information to help you choose a health care provider or service.

Clinical trials are research studies that test how well new medical approaches work in people. Each study 
answers scientific questions and tries to find better ways to prevent, screen for, diagnose, or treat a 
disease. Clinical trials may also compare a new treatment to a treatment that is already available. Every clinical trial has a protocol, or action plan, for conducting the trial. The plan describes what 
will be done in the study, how it will be conducted, and why each part of the study is necessary. Each study 
has its own rules about who can take part. Some studies need volunteers with a certain disease. Some need 
healthy people. Others want just men or just women. An Institutional Review Board (IRB) reviews, monitors, and approves many clinical trials. It is an independent committee of physicians, statisticians, and members of the community. Its role is to: Make sure that the study is ethical Protect the rights and welfare of the participants Make sure that the risks are reasonable when compared to the potential benefits In the United States, a clinical trial must have an IRB if it is studying a drug, biological product, or medical device that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates, or it is funded or carried out by the federal government. NIH: National Institutes of Health

Planning for the end of life can be difficult.  But by deciding what end-of-life care best suits your needs when you are healthy, you can help those close to you make the right choices when the time comes. End-of-life planning usually includes making choices about the following: The goals of care (for example, whether to use certain medicines during the last days of life) Where you want to spend your final days Which treatments for end-of-life care you wish to receive What type of palliative care and hospice care you wish to receive Advance directives can help make your wishes clear to your family and health care providers.

Why do I need to evaluate health information? Health information is easy to find. But finding reliable health information takes a little effort. Some of the health information you get from newspapers, magazines, books, TV, the Internet, and social media is up to date and trustworthy. But some is not. That's why it's important to evaluate health information for yourself. But how can you tell the good from the bad? There are two key steps: Ask questions before you trust what you read or hear. Discuss the information you find with your health care provider before you rely on it. You may have found good information, but your provider can tell you whether it's good for you . How can I evaluate health information on the Internet? Asking a few questions will help you decide if you can trust a website. You can usually find most of the answers on the site's "About Us" page.  If you can't find information about who runs the website, the site may not be trustworthy, and their health information may be unreliable. Some questions to ask are: Who runs the site? Can you trust them to provide balanced, accurate information? Trustworthy sites provide a way to contact the owners with questions or feedback. In general, you'll find good health information on websites run by: Federal government agencies. Medical schools. Large professional or nonprofit organizations. For example, the American College of Cardiology (a professional organization) and the American Heart Association (a nonprofit) and are both reliable sources of information on heart health. What's the purpose of the site? Is it to: Inform the public? Sell products or services? Promote the opinions of a person or group? A trustworthy website has one goal: To give you good information. Who pays for the site? If the site is funded by ads, they should be clearly marked as advertisements.  Watch out for ads designed to look like neutral health information. If a business pays for the site, the health information may favor that business and its products. Is the health information high quality? Good health information doesn't promote one treatment over another. It gives you balanced facts based on research. So, beware of dramatic writing, promises of cures, and claims that sound too good to be true. Those could be signs of a health fraud scam . To evaluate the quality of a website's information, ask: How is the information selected and reviewed to make sure it's accurate? Check the "About Us" page to see if the site has: An editorial board of health experts A content review process A selection policy for content Information about their writers' qualifications, which may be listed at the bottom of the articles Where does the information come from? The content pages should have links or references to the sources of the information. Is the information up to date? Content pages should include dates when the information was written, reviewed, or updated. How does the website use your personal information? Look for a privacy policy section to see how your personal information will be used. Don't share information about yourself unless you're comfortable with any risks involved. When you find a website that seems to be trustworthy, don't stop there. Look to see if other reliable sites have similar health information. How can I evaluate health information on social media? A social media post may come from someone you know, but that doesn't guarantee it's good information. Many of the questions you use to evaluate a website also work for social media too. Ask where the information comes from, why it exists, and if anyone is funding it. If you're not sure whether the information you see on social media is trustworthy, don"t share it with others. How can I evaluate health stories in the news? Some news stories about medical research may not include all the facts you need to know.  Ask these questions: Does the story say whether the research involved people or animals? If it was people, how many people were in the study and who were they? How long was the study? What type of study was it? Who paid for the research? If you learn a few tips for understanding medical research , you'll be able to decide if a news story may apply to your health. Then you can discuss the information with your provider. How can I evaluate health information in books? To evaluate health information in books, ask: How old is the book? Is the author an expert on the subject? Does the book offer different points of view or just those of the author? Has the book been reviewed by other experts? Does the book list the sources of the content? After you evaluate health information, talk with your provider before using it to make decisions that may affect your health. NIH: National Library of Medicine

What is health literacy? Health literacy involves the information that people need to be able to make good decisions about health. There are two parts: Personal health literacy is about how well a person can find and understand the health information and services that they need. It is also about using the information and services to make good health decisions. Organizational health literacy is about how well organizations help people find the health information and services that they need. It also includes helping them use that information to make good health decisions. Which factors can affect health literacy? Many different factors can affect a person's health literacy, including their: Knowledge of medical words Understanding of how the health care system works Ability to communicate with health care providers Ability to find health information, which may require computer skills Reading, writing, and number skills Personal factors, such as age, income, education, language abilities, and culture Physical or mental limitations Many of the same people who are at risk for limited health literacy also have health disparities . Health disparities are health differences between different groups of people. These groups may be based on age, race, sex, or other factors. Why is health literacy important? Health literacy is important because it can affect your ability to: Make good decisions about your health. Get the medical care you need. This includes preventative care, which is care that focuses on preventing disease and keeping you healthy. Take your medicines correctly . Manage a disease, especially a chronic (long-term) disease . Lead a healthy lifestyle. One thing that you can do is to make sure that you communicate well with your health care providers . If you don't understand something a provider tells you, ask them to explain it to you so that you understand. You can also ask the provider to write down their instructions.

The field of ethics studies principles of right and wrong. There is hardly an area in medicine that doesn't have an ethical aspect. For example, there are ethical issues relating to
: End of life care : Should a patient receive nutrition ? What about advance directives and resuscitation orders? Abortion : When does life begin? Is it ethical to terminate a pregnancy with a birth defect? Genetic and prenatal testing: What happens if you are a carrier of a defect? What if testing shows that your unborn baby has a defect? Birth control : Should it be available to minors? Is it ethical to harvest embryonic stem cells to treat diseases? Organ donation : Must a relative donate an organ to a sick relative? Your personal health information: who has access to your records ? Patient rights : Do you have the right to refuse treatment? When you talk with your doctor , is it ethical for her to withhold information from you or your family?

Palliative care is treatment of the discomfort, symptoms, and stress of serious illness.  It provides relief from distressing symptoms including: Pain Shortness of breath Fatigue Constipation Nausea Loss of appetite Problems with sleep It can also help you deal with the side effects of the medical treatments you're receiving. Hospice care , care at the end of life, always includes palliative care.  But you may receive palliative care at any stage of an illness.  The goal is to make you comfortable and improve your quality of life. NIH: National Institute of Nursing Research

What are patient rights? As a patient, you have certain rights. Some are guaranteed by federal law, such as the right to get a copy of your medical records and the right to keep them private and secure. Many states have additional laws protecting patients. And some states, insurance plans, medical organizations, and health care facilities have their own patient bill of rights. Some other examples of patient rights include: Being treated with respect Not being discriminated against in your medical care The right to refuse treatment The right of informed consent What is informed consent? Informed consent is an important patient right. It is a process in which your health care provider gives you the information you need to make decisions about your care. The types of care could be treatments, procedures, genetic testing, or clinical trials. The information should include the risks and benefits of the care, as well as details about your medical condition. It's important that you understand everything before you give consent. Sometimes your provider will ask you to sign a form to give your consent. This is called written consent. You have the right to change your mind about consent at any time. Where can I get help with patient rights? There are different resources that can help you if you have a problem with your patient rights: Many hospitals have patient advocates. These are people who can help guide you through the health care system and make sure that your rights are protected. Your state may have resources to help you, such as: Your state may have an office (called an ombudsmen office) for problems with long term care. Your state's department of health may be able to help. States also have oversight agencies for insurance companies and various types of health care facilities and providers. These agencies make sure that these organizations and providers follow the rules so you can get quality care. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has an Office for Civil Rights (OCR). You can file a complaint with them if you feel you have been discriminated against in your medical care or if you think your health information privacy rights have been violated.

You can help prevent medical errors by being an active member of your health care team. Research shows that patients who are more involved with their care tend to get better results.  To reduce the risk of medical errors, you can: Ask questions if you have doubts or concerns. Take a relative or friend to your doctor appointment to help you ask questions and understand answers. Make sure you understand what will happen if you need surgery Tell your health care providers about all the medicines you take, including over-the-counter drugs and dietary supplements. Tell them if you have any allergies or bad reactions to anesthesia. Make sure you know how to take your medications correctly . Get a second opinion about treatment options Keep a copy of your own medical history Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

You've probably seen your chart at your doctor's office. In fact, you may have charts at several doctors' offices.  If you've been in the hospital, you have a chart there, too. These charts are your medical records. They may be on paper or electronic. To keep track of all this information, it's a good idea to keep your own personal health record. What kind of information would you put in a personal health record? You could start with: Your name, birth date, blood type, and emergency contact information Date of last physical Dates and results of tests and screenings Major illnesses and surgeries, with dates A list of your medicines and supplements, the dosages, and how long you've taken them Any allergies Any chronic diseases Any history of illnesses in your family

How well you and your doctor or provider communicate with each other is one of the most important parts of getting good health care. Being prepared can help you make the most of your visit, whether it is in person or through telehealth . Here are some things you can do to make the most of your appointment: Make lists of any allergies you have and all the medicines, herbs , vitamins , and supplements you take. Make a list of the questions and concerns you want to talk about. If you are having any health problems, write down a description of your symptoms. Include information such as when they started, what makes them better, and what makes them worse. Ask a trusted friend or family member to come to the appointment with you. If your doctor or provider doesn't speak your language, call their office ahead of time and ask them to provide an interpreter. During your appointment, take notes about what your doctor or health care provider tells you. Or you could ask your friend or family member to take notes for you. Be honest during your appointment. Don't just say what you think your doctor or provider wants to hear. For example, don't say that you stopped smoking or are eating healthy if it's not true. Your doctor or provider needs to know what is really going on, so they can give you the care and treatments that would be best for you. If you don't understand something your doctor or provider says, ask questions until you do understand. Ask for written instructions if you need them. Learn how to access your medical records, so you can keep track of your test results, diagnoses, treatment plans, and medicines. Ask for your doctor's or provider's contact information and find out the best way to communicate with them. Find out what to do if you need more information later.

Almost every day, new findings from medical research are published in scientific journals. These journal articles often become sources for news stories. They can be important tools in helping you manage your health. But it's not always easy to understand them and know what they mean for your life. For example: What you hear about a study may not explain how it fits into the bigger picture. Sometimes the results of one study seem to disagree with the results of another study. That could be because the studies could have different designs and asked different questions. The news stories don't always explain this. Sometimes the studies are very small, and researchers need to do more studies to confirm the results. But the news stories about these small studies may not highlight this. So it's important to think carefully when reading or listening to reports of new medical findings. Here are some questions that can help you evaluate that information : Was the study in animals or humans? Getting certain results in animals may not mean that you get those same results in humans. Were the people in the study similar to you in ways that may matter, such as age, race, or sex? How big was the study? Larger studies may get more reliable results than smaller studies. How long did the study last? For example, studies testing medicines need to be long enough to show long-term benefits or risks. What kind of study was it? Clinical trials , especially randomized controlled trials, give the clearest information about whether a treatment is effective and safe in humans. In randomized controlled trials, the people in the study are randomly divided into separate groups that get different treatments. This helps prevent bias in the results. Where was the research done? If a new treatment was being tested, what were the side effects? How common were they? How do the results from the study compare with previous studies? If the new study had different results, then more studies would be needed to confirm these results. Who paid for the research? Sometimes the people paying for the research could profit financially if the study gets certain results. Who is reporting the results? Do they have a certain bias? It can be helpful to stay informed about new medical findings. But it's good to have some skepticism. Keep these questions in mind the next time you hear about a big new medical breakthrough.

Barotrauma means injury to your body because of changes in barometric (air) or water pressure.  One common type happens to your ear . A change in altitude may cause your ears to hurt. This can happen if you are flying in an airplane, driving in the mountains, or scuba diving.  Divers can also get decompression sickness, which affects the whole body. Common symptoms of ear barotrauma include: Pain A feeling that your ears are stuffed Hearing loss Dizziness Treatments for ear barotrauma include chewing gum and yawning to relieve the pressure. Medications such as decongestants may also help.

As parents, we want to keep our children safe from harm. Take steps to keep your children safe: Install the right child safety seat in your car Teach children how to cross the street safely Make sure they wear the right gear and equipment for sports Install and test smoke alarms Store medicines, cleaners and other dangerous substances in locked cabinets Babyproof your home Don't leave small children unattended

Where are germs found? Germs are a part of everyday life. Some of them are helpful, but others are harmful and cause disease. They can be found everywhere - in our air, soil, and water. They are on our skin and in our bodies. Germs are also on the surfaces and objects that we touch. Sometimes those germs can spread to you and make you sick. For example, there could be germs on a tv remote. You could get infected with the germs if you touch the remote and then rub your eyes or nose or eat with your hands. How can I avoid getting germs from surfaces and objects? To avoid becoming infected by germs from surfaces and objects, it is important to wash your hands often . But you can't wash your hands every time you touch something. So it's also important to regularly clean and disinfect surfaces and objects. What is the difference between cleaning, sanitizing, and disinfecting? Some people think that disinfecting is same thing as cleaning or sanitizing. But they are actually different: Cleaning removes dirt, dust, crumbs, and germs from surfaces or objects. When you clean, you will likely use soap (or detergent) and water to physically clean off the surfaces and objects. This may not necessarily kill the germs. But since you removed some of them, there are fewer germs that could spread infection to you. Disinfecting uses chemicals (disinfectants) to kill germs on surfaces and objects. Some common disinfectants are bleach and alcohol solutions. You usually need to leave the disinfectant on the surfaces and objects for a certain period of time to kill the germs. Disinfecting does not necessarily clean dirty surfaces or remove germs. Sanitizing could be done by either cleaning, disinfecting, or both. Sanitizing means that you are lowering the number of germs to a safe level. What is considered a safe level depends on public health standards or requirements at a workplace, school, etc. For example, there are sanitizing procedures for restaurants and other facilities that prepare food. What you do to sanitize will vary, depending on your needs. You might be mopping a floor using a mop, a chemical, and water. You might use a dishwasher to sanitize the dishes. Or you could be using an antibacterial wipe on a tv remote. If you both clean and disinfect a surface or object, you can further lower the risk of spreading infection. There are products that clean and disinfect at the same time. Which surfaces and objects do I need to clean and disinfect? To prevent the spread of infection, you should regularly clean and disinfect surfaces and objects that are touched often. For example, in your house, this would include countertops, doorknobs, faucet and toilet handles, light switches, remotes, and toys. How can I safely clean and disinfect? It's important to be safe when using cleaning and disinfecting products: Store them in the containers they came in. Always follow the instructions and pay attention to the warnings on the label. Do not mix cleaners and disinfectants unless the labels say that it is safe to do so. Combining certain products (such as chlorine bleach and ammonia cleaners) can cause serious injury or even death. Check the label to see whether you need to use gloves to protect your hands and/or eye protection when using the products If you swallow, inhale, or get them on your skin , follow the directions on the label or get medical help Store them out of the reach of children

Before any drug can be sold in the United States, it must be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This is true whether it's a prescription or an over-the-counter drug. The FDA evaluates both the effectiveness and safety of a drug by looking at: How animal testing and human clinical trials affect the condition the drug is treating If any side effects occur How it's manufactured What the labeling says The FDA also monitors a drug's safety after approval. Health care providers and patients can report drug side effects through the FDA's MedWatch website . For you, drug safety means buying online only from licensed pharmacies located in the United States. It also means knowing how to take your medicines correctly .

Ergonomics looks at what kind of work you do, what tools you use and your whole job environment.  The aim is to find the best fit between you and your job conditions. Examples of ergonomic changes to your work might include: Adjusting the position of your computer keyboard to prevent carpal tunnel syndrome Being sure that the height of your desk chair allows your feet to rest flat on floor Learning the right way to lift heavy objects to prevent back injuries Using handle coatings or special gloves to suppress vibrations from power tools Making sure that you have good posture in whatever you do, whether it is sitting in front of a computer, standing at a checkout, or walking around a warehouse No matter what the job is, the goal is to make sure that you are safe, comfortable, and less prone to work-related injuries.

Falls can be dangerous at any age. Babies and young children can get hurt falling off furniture or down the stairs. Older children may fall off playground equipment. For older adults, falls can be especially serious. They are at higher risk of falling. They are also more likely to fracture (break) a bone when they fall, especially if they have osteoporosis . A broken bone, especially when it is in a hip , may even lead to disability and a loss of independence for older adults. Some common causes of falls include: Balance problems Some medicines, which can make you feel dizzy, confused, or slow Vision problems Alcohol, which can affect your balance and reflexes Muscle weakness, especially in your legs, which can make it harder for you to get up from a chair or keep your balance when walking on an uneven surface. Certain illnesses, such as low blood pressure , diabetes , and neuropathy Slow reflexes, which make it hard to keep your balance or move out of the way of a hazard Tripping or slipping due to loss of footing or traction At any age, people can make changes to lower their risk of falling. It important to take care of your health, including getting regular eye exams . Regular exercise may lower your risk of falls by strengthening your muscles, improving your balance, and keeping your bones strong. And you can look for ways to make your house safer. For example, you can get rid of tripping hazards and make sure that you have rails on the stairs and in the bath. To reduce the chances of breaking a bone if you do fall, make sure that you get enough calcium and vitamin D . NIH: National Institute on Aging

Preventing fires is an important part of fire safety. In the United States, cooking is the main cause of home fires. Cigarettes are a big risk too - they are the leading cause of fire deaths. Here are some fire prevention tips: Don't leave the stove or oven unattended when they are on Don't let children use kitchen appliances unsupervised Don't smoke in bed Make sure your electrical appliances and cords are in good condition It is also important to be prepared in case there is a fire. Make sure that you have working smoke detectors on every floor and in every bedroom. You should also have fire extinguishers on every floor and in your kitchen.  Make and practice an escape plan in case the main exit is blocked.

Accidents happen. Someone chokes on an ice cube or gets stung by a bee. It is important to know when to call 911 -- it is for life-threatening emergencies.  While waiting for help to arrive, you may be able to save someone's life. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) is for people whose hearts or breathing has stopped and the Heimlich maneuver is for people who are choking. You can also learn to handle common injuries and wounds . Cuts and scrapes, for example, should be rinsed with cool water. To stop bleeding, apply firm but gentle pressure, using gauze. If blood soaks through, add more gauze, keeping the first layer in place. Continue to apply pressure. It is important to have a first aid kit available.  Keep one at home and one in your car. It should include a first-aid guide.  Read the guide to learn how to use the items, so you are ready in case an emergency happens.

Safe steps in food handling, cooking, and storage can prevent foodborne illness . There are four basic steps to food safety at home: Clean - always wash your fruits and vegetables, hands, counters, and cooking utensils. Separate - keep raw foods to themselves. Germs can spread from one food to another. Cook - foods need to get hot and stay hot. Heat kills germs. Chill - put fresh food in the refrigerator right away. In the grocery store, avoid cans that are bulging or jars that have cracks or loose lids. Check packages to be sure food hasn't reached its expiration date. United States Department of Agriculture

The products you use for cleaning, carpentry, auto repair, gardening, and many other household uses can contain ingredients that can harm you, your family, and the environment. These include : Oven and drain cleaners Cleaning and disinfecting products , including bleach and antibacterial cleaners Laundry powder Floor polish Paint thinners, strippers, and removers Pesticides Grease and rust removers Motor oil and fuel additives Arts and craft supplies Toxic substances in these products can cause harm if inhaled, swallowed, or absorbed through the skin. People respond to toxic substances in different ways. At high doses, a toxic substance might cause birth defects or other serious problems, including brain damage or death. To avoid problems, keep products in the containers they come in and use them exactly as the label says. Follow label directions or get medical help if you swallow or inhale them or get them on your skin. Environmental Protection Agency

Impaired driving is dangerous. It's the cause of more than half of all car crashes.  It means operating a motor vehicle while you are affected by: Alcohol Legal or illegal drugs Sleepiness Distractions, such as using a cell phone or texting Having a medical condition which affects your driving For your safety and the safety of others, do not drive while impaired.  Have someone else drive you or take public transportation when you cannot drive. If you need to take a call or send a text message, pull over. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

Every year, lives are lost because of the spread of infections in hospitals. Health care workers can take steps to prevent the spread of infectious diseases . These steps are part of infection control. Proper hand washing is the most effective way to prevent the spread of infections in hospitals. If you are a patient, don't be afraid to remind friends, family and health care providers to wash their hands before getting close to you. Other steps health care workers can take include: Covering coughs and sneezes Staying up to date with vaccinations Using gloves, masks and protective clothing Making tissues and hand cleaners available Following hospital guidelines when dealing with blood or contaminated items

A medical device is any product used to diagnose, cure, or treat a condition, or to prevent disease. They range from small and simple, like a blood glucose meter, to large and complicated, like a ventilator. You might use one at home or at work, or you may need one in a hospital. To use medical devices safely: Know how your device works. Keep instructions close by Understand and properly respond to device alarms Have a back-up plan and supplies in the event of an emergency Keep emergency numbers available and update them as needed Educate your family and caregivers about your device Food and Drug Administration

Every year thousands of people in the U.S. die from motor vehicle crashes. Trying to prevent these crashes is one part of motor vehicle safety.  Here are some things you can do to be safer on the road: Make sure your vehicle is safe and in working order Use car seats for children Wear your seat belt Don't speed or drive aggressively Don't drive impaired Safety also involves being aware of others. Share the road with bicycles and motorcycles, and watch for pedestrians.

Occupational health problems occur at work or because of the kind of work you do. These problems can include: Cuts, fractures (broken bones), and sprains and strains Loss of limbs Repetitive motion disorders Hearing problems caused by exposure to noise Vision problems Illness caused by breathing, touching, or swallowing unsafe substances Illness caused by exposure to radiation Exposure to germs in health care settings Good job safety and prevention practices can reduce your risk of these problems. Try to stay fit, reduce stress, set up your work area properly, and use the right equipment and gear.

Health care workers are exposed to many job hazards. These can include : Infections Needle injuries Back injuries Allergy-causing substances Violence Stress Follow good job safety and injury prevention practices. They can reduce your risk of health problems. Use protective equipment, follow infection control guidelines, learn the right way to lift heavy objects, and find ways to manage stress. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health

A poison is any substance that is harmful to your body. You might swallow it, inhale it, inject it, or absorb it through your skin. Any substance can be poisonous if too much is taken. Poisons can include: Prescription or over-the-counter medicines taken in doses that are too high Overdoses of illegal drugs Carbon monoxide from gas appliances Household products , such as laundry powder or furniture polish Pesticides Indoor or outdoor plants Metals such as lead and mercury The effects of poisoning range from short-term illness to brain damage, coma, and death. To prevent poisoning it is important to use and store products exactly as their labels say. Keep dangerous products where children can't get to them. Treatment for poisoning depends on the type of poison. If you suspect someone has been poisoned, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222 right away.

You can't remove all the safety hazards from your life, but you can reduce them. To avoid many major hazards and prepare for emergencies: Keep emergency phone numbers by your telephones Make a first aid kit for your home Make a family emergency plan Install and maintain smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors Keep guns unloaded and locked up. Lock up the ammunition separately. Follow the directions carefully when using tools or equipment Young children are especially at risk.  Supervision is the best way to keep them safe. Childproofing the house can also help.

Playing sports can be fun, but it can also be dangerous if you are not careful. You can help prevent injuries by: Getting a physical to make sure you are healthy before you start playing your sport Wearing the right shoes, gear, and equipment Drinking lots of water Warming up and stretching If you have already hurt yourself playing a sport, make sure you recover completely before you start up again.  If possible, protect the injured part of your body with padding, a brace, or special equipment. When you do start playing again, start slowly.

What are vaccines? Vaccines play an important role in keeping us healthy. They protect us from serious and sometimes deadly diseases. Vaccines are injections (shots), liquids, pills, or nasal sprays that you take to teach your body's immune system to recognize and defend against harmful germs. The germs could be viruses or bacteria . Some types of vaccines contain germs that cause disease. But the germs have been killed or weakened enough that they won't make you sick. Some vaccines only contain a part of a germ. Other types of vaccines include instructions for your cells to make a protein of the germ. These different vaccine types all spark an immune response, which helps your body fight off the germs. Your immune system will also remember the germ and attack it if that germ ever invades again. This protection against a certain disease is called immunity. These diseases can be very serious. Because of this, getting immunity from a vaccine is safer than getting immunity by being sick with the disease. And for a few vaccines, getting vaccinated can actually give you a better immune response than getting the disease would. Do vaccines cause side effects? As with medicines, any vaccine can cause side effects. Most of the time the side effects are minor, such as a sore arm, fatigue , or mild fever . They usually go away within a few days. These common side effects are often a sign that your body is starting to build immunity against a disease. Serious side effects from vaccines can happen, but they are very rare. These side effects could include a severe allergic reaction . Other possible side effects are different for each vaccine. Talk with your health care provider if you're concerned about your health after getting vaccinated. Some people worry that childhood vaccines could cause autism spectrum disorder (ASD). But many scientific studies have looked at this and have found no link between vaccines and ASD. How are vaccines tested for safety? Every vaccine that is approved in the United States goes through extensive safety testing. It starts with testing and evaluation of the vaccine before it's approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This process can often take several years.: First, the vaccine is tested in labs. Based on those tests, the FDA decides whether to test the vaccine with people. Testing with people is done through clinical trials . In these trials, the vaccines are tested on volunteers. Clinical trials usually start with 20 to 100 volunteers, but eventually include thousands of volunteers. The clinical trials have three phases. The trials are looking for the answer to important questions such as Is the vaccine safe? What dose (amount) works best? How does the immune system react to it? How effective is it? During the process, the FDA works closely with the company who makes the vaccine to evaluate the vaccine's safety and effectiveness. If the vaccine is found to be safe and effective, it will be approved and licensed by the FDA. After a vaccine is licensed, experts may consider adding it to the recommended vaccine, or immunization, schedule. This schedule is from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). It lists which vaccines are recommended for different groups of people. They list which age groups should get which vaccines, how many doses they need, and when they should get them. Testing and monitoring continue after the vaccine is approved: The company making the vaccines tests every batch of vaccines for quality and safety. The FDA reviews the results of these tests. It also inspects the factories where the vaccine is made. These checks help make sure the vaccines meet standards for quality and safety. The FDA, CDC, and other federal agencies continue to monitor its safety, to watch for possible side effects. They have systems to track any safety issues with the vaccines. These high safety standards and testing help to make sure that vaccines in the United States are safe. Vaccines help protect against serious, even deadly, diseases. They not only protect you, but also help to keep these diseases from spreading to others.

Playing in the water - whether swimming, boating or diving - can be fun. It can also be dangerous, especially for children. Being safe can help prevent injuries and drowning . To stay safe in the water: Avoid alcohol when swimming or boating Wear a life jacket whenever you're in a boat Don't swim alone, or in bad weather Learn CPR Learn to swim and teach your children to swim Supervise your children when they are in the water Prevent sunburns - use plenty of sunscreen

An injury is damage to your body. It is a general term that refers to harm caused by accidents, falls , hits, weapons, and more. In the U.S., millions of people injure themselves every year. These injuries range from minor to life-threatening. Injuries can happen at work or play , indoors or outdoors, driving a car, or walking across the street. Wounds are injuries that break the skin or other body tissues.   They include cuts, scrapes, scratches, and punctured skin. They often happen because of an accident, but surgery, sutures, and stitches also cause wounds. Minor wounds usually aren't serious, but it is important to clean them. Serious and infected wounds may require first aid followed by a visit to your doctor. You should also seek attention if the wound is deep, you cannot close it yourself, you cannot stop the bleeding or get the dirt out, or it does not heal. Other common types of injuries include: Animal bites Bruises Burns Dislocations Electrical injuries Fractures (broken bones) Sprains and strains

What are body lice? Body lice (also called clothes lice) are tiny insects which live and lay nits (lice eggs) on clothing. They are parasites, and they need to feed on human blood to survive. They usually only move to the skin to feed. Body lice are one of the three types of lice that live on humans. The other two types are head lice and pubic lice . Each type of lice is different, and getting one type does not mean that you will get another type. Body lice can spread diseases, such as typhus, trench fever, and relapsing fever. How do body lice spread? Body lice move by crawling, because they cannot hop or fly. One way that they spread is through physical contact with a person who has body lice. They can also spread through contact with clothing, beds, bed linens, or towels that were used by a person with body lice. You cannot get lice from animals. Who is at risk for body lice? Body lice is most common in people who cannot bathe and wash their clothes regularly, especially if they live in crowded conditions. In the United States, this is most often people experiencing homelessness . In other countries, body lice can also affect refugees and victims of war or natural disasters. What are the symptoms of body lice? The most common symptom of body lice is intense itching . There may also be a rash, which is caused by an allergic reaction to the bites. The itching causes some people to scratch until they get sores. Sometimes these sores can become infected with bacteria or fungi . If someone has body lice for a long time, the heavily bitten areas of their skin can become thickened and discolored. This is most common around your midsection (waist, groin, and upper thighs). How do you know if you have body lice? A diagnosis of body lice usually comes from finding nits and crawling lice in the seams of clothing. Sometimes a body louse can be seen crawling or feeding on the skin. Other times it takes a magnifying lens to see the lice or nits. What are the treatments for body lice? The main treatment for body lice is to improve personal hygiene. That means regular showers and washing clothes, bedding, and towels at least once a week. Use hot water to wash the laundry, and dry it using the hot cycle of the dryer. Some people may also need a lice-killing medicine. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Sexual abuse is one form of child abuse . It includes a wide range of actions between a child and an adult or older child. Often these involve body contact, but not always. Exposing one's genitals to children or pressuring them for sex is sexual abuse. Using a child for pornography is also sexual abuse. Most sexual abusers know the child they abuse. They may be family friends, neighbors or babysitters. About one-third of abusers are related to the child. Most abusers are men. If you think a child may have been abused, it's important to report it.

What is chlamydia? Chlamydia is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI). It is caused by bacteria called Chlamydia trachomatis . Anyone can get chlamydia. It often doesn't cause symptoms, so people may not know that they have it. Antibiotics can cure it. But if it's not treated, chlamydia can cause serious health problems. How is chlamydia spread? You can get chlamydia during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with someone who has chlamydia. A pregnant person can also pass chlamydia to the baby during childbirth . If you've had chlamydia and were treated in the past, you can get re-infected if you have unprotected sex with someone who has it. Who is more likely to get chlamydia? Chlamydia is more common in young people, especially young women. You are more likely to get infected with chlamydia if you don't consistently use a condom or if you have multiple partners. What are the symptoms of chlamydia? Chlamydia doesn't usually cause any symptoms. So you may not realize that you have it. But even if you don't have symptoms, you can still pass the infection to others. If you do have symptoms, they may not appear until several weeks after you have sex with someone who has chlamydia. Symptoms in women include: Abnormal vaginal discharge, which may have a strong smell A burning sensation when urinating If the infection spreads, you might get lower abdominal (belly) pain , pain during sex, nausea , and fever . Symptoms in men include: Discharge from your penis A burning sensation when urinating (peeing) Pain and swelling in one or both testicles (although this is less common) If the chlamydia infects the rectum (in men or women), it can cause rectal pain, discharge, and bleeding. How is chlamydia diagnosed? There are lab tests to diagnose chlamydia. Your health care provider may ask you to provide a urine sample. Or your provider may use (or ask you to use) a cotton swab to get a sample from your vagina to test for chlamydia. Who should be tested for chlamydia? You should go to your provider for a test if you have symptoms of chlamydia or if you have a partner who has an STI. Pregnant people should get a test when they go to their first prenatal visit . People at higher risk should get checked for chlamydia every year: Sexually active women 25 and younger Older women who have new or multiple sex partners or a sex partner who has an STI Men who have sex with men (MSM) What other problems can chlamydia cause? In women, an untreated infection can spread to your uterus and fallopian tubes, causing pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID can cause permanent damage to your reproductive system. This can lead to long-term pelvic pain , infertility , and ectopic pregnancy . Women who have had chlamydia infections more than once are at higher risk of serious reproductive health complications. Men often don't have health problems from chlamydia. Sometimes it can infect the epididymis (the tube that carries sperm). This can cause pain, fever, and, rarely, infertility . Both men and women can develop reactive arthritis because of a chlamydia infection. Reactive arthritis is a type of arthritis that happens as a "reaction" to an infection in the body. Babies born to infected mothers can get eye infections and pneumonia from chlamydia. It may also make it more likely for your baby to be born too early . Untreated chlamydia may also increase your chances of getting or giving HIV . What are the treatments for chlamydia? Antibiotics will cure the infection. You may get a one-time dose of the antibiotics, or you may need to take medicine every day for 7 days. It is important to take all the medicine that your provider prescribed for you. Antibiotics cannot repair any permanent damage that the disease has caused. To prevent spreading the disease to your partner, you should not have sex until the infection has cleared up. If you got a one-time dose of antibiotics, you should wait 7 days after taking the medicine to have sex again. If you have to take medicine every day for 7 days, you should not have sex again until you have finished taking all of the doses of your medicine. It is common to get a repeat infection, so you need to get tested again about three months after treatment. Can chlamydia be prevented? The only sure way to prevent chlamydia is to not have vaginal, anal, or oral sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading chlamydia. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common type of male sexual dysfunction. It is when a man has trouble getting or keeping an erection. ED becomes more common as you get older.  But it's not a natural part of aging. Some people have trouble speaking with their doctors about sex. But if you have ED, you should tell your doctor. ED can be a sign of health problems. It may mean your blood vessels are clogged. It may mean you have nerve damage from diabetes. If you don't see your doctor, these problems will go untreated. Your doctor can offer several new treatments for ED. For many men, the answer is as simple as taking a pill. Getting more exercise, losing weight, or stopping smoking may also help. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). It can cause sores on your genital or rectal area, buttocks, and thighs.  You can get it from having vaginal, anal, or oral sex with someone who has it. The virus can spread even when sores are not present. Mothers can also infect their babies during childbirth. Symptoms of herpes are called outbreaks.  You usually get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. The sores are blisters which break and become painful, and then heal. Sometimes people do not know they have herpes because they have no symptoms or very mild symptoms. The virus can be more serious in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems. Repeat outbreaks are common, especially during the first year. Over time, you get them less often and the symptoms become milder.  The virus stays in your body for life. There are tests that can diagnose genital herpes. There is no cure.  However, medicines can help lessen symptoms, decrease outbreaks, and lower the risk of passing the virus to others. Correct usage of latex condoms can reduce, but not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading herpes. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex.

Genital warts are a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV). The warts usually appear as a small bump or group of bumps in the genital area. They are flesh-colored and can be flat or look bumpy like cauliflower. Some genital warts are so small you cannot see them. In women, the warts usually occur in or around the vagina, on the cervix, or around the anus. In men, genital warts are less common. They may have warts on the tip of the penis, around the anus, or on the scrotum, thigh, or groin. You can get genital warts during oral, vaginal, or anal sex with an infected partner.  Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. HPV vaccines may help prevent some of the HPV infections that cause genital warts. Your health care provider usually diagnoses genital warts by seeing them. The warts might disappear on their own. If not, your health care provider can treat or remove them. HPV stays in your body even after treatment, so warts can come back. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection (STI).  It is most common in young adults. The bacteria that cause gonorrhea can infect the genital tract, mouth, or anus. You can get gonorrhea during vaginal, oral, or anal sex with an infected partner.   A pregnant woman can pass it to her baby during childbirth. Gonorrhea does not always cause symptoms. In men, gonorrhea can cause pain when urinating and discharge from the penis. If untreated, it can cause problems with the prostate and testicles. In women, the early symptoms of gonorrhea often are mild. Later, it can cause bleeding between periods, pain when urinating, and increased discharge from the vagina. If untreated, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease , which causes problems with pregnancy and infertility. Your health care provider will diagnose gonorrhea with lab tests. Treatment is with antibiotics. Treating gonorrhea is becoming more difficult because drug-resistant strains are increasing. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading gonorrhea. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Herpes is an infection that is caused by a herpes simplex virus (HSV). Oral herpes causes cold sores around the mouth or face. Genital herpes affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area.  Genital herpes is a sexually transmitted infection (STI). It affects the genitals, buttocks or anal area. Other herpes infections can affect the eyes, skin, or other parts of the body. The virus can be dangerous in newborn babies or in people with weak immune systems. There are two types of HSV: HSV type 1 most commonly causes cold sores. It can also cause genital herpes. HSV type 2 is the usual cause of genital herpes, but it also can infect the mouth. HSV spreads through direct contact. Some people have no symptoms. Others get sores near the area where the virus has entered the body. They turn into blisters, become itchy and painful, and then heal. Most people have outbreaks several times a year. Over time, you get them less often. Medicines to help your body fight the virus can help lessen symptoms and decrease outbreaks.

What is HPV? Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of related viruses. They can cause warts on different parts of your body. There are more than 200 types. About 40 of them are spread through direct sexual contact with someone who has the virus. They can also spread through other intimate, skin-to-skin contact. Some of these types can cause cancer. There are two categories of sexually transmitted HPV. Low-risk HPV can cause warts on or around your genitals , anus, mouth, or throat. High-risk HPV can cause various cancers: Cervical cancer Anal cancer Some types of oral and throat cancer Vulvar cancer Vaginal cancer Penile cancer Most HPV infections go away on their own and don't cause cancer. But sometimes the infections last longer. When a high-risk HPV infection lasts for many years, it can lead to cell changes. If these changes are not treated, they may get worse over time and become cancer. Who is at risk for HPV infections? HPV infections are very common. Nearly all sexually active people are infected with HPV soon after they become sexually active. What are the symptoms of HPV infections? Some people develop warts from certain low-risk HPV infections, but the other types (including the high-risk types) have no symptoms. If a high-risk HPV infection lasts for many years and causes cell changes, you may have symptoms. You may also have symptoms if those cell changes develop into cancer. Which symptoms you have depends on which part of the body is affected. How are HPV infections diagnosed? Health care providers can usually diagnose warts by looking at them. For women, there are cervical cancer screening tests which can find changes in the cervix that might lead to cancer.  As part of the screening, women may have Pap tests , HPV tests , or both. What are the treatments for HPV infections? An HPV infection itself cannot be treated. There are medicines that you can apply to a wart. If they don't work, your health care provide could freeze, burn, or surgically remove it. There are treatments for the cell changes caused by infection with high-risk HPV. They include medicines that you apply to the area that is affected and various surgical procedures. People who have HPV-related cancers usually get the same types of treatment as people who have cancers that are not caused by HPV. An exception to this is for people who have certain oral and throat cancers. They may have different treatment options. Can HPV infections be prevented? Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading HPV. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Vaccines can protect against several types of HPV, including some that can cause cancer. The vaccines provide the most protection when people get them before they are exposed to the virus. This means that it is best for people to get them before they become sexually active. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Members of the LGBTQIA+ community include people who are: L esbian G ay B isexual T ransgender Q ueer or Q uestioning I ntersex A sexual Elsewhere on the gender and sexuality spectrum or allies to the community On this page you'll find information about health issues that are specific to the LGBTQIA+ community.

Pelvic pain occurs mostly in the lower abdomen area. The pain might be steady, or it might come and go. It can be a sharp and stabbing pain in a specific spot, or a dull pain that is spread out. If the pain is severe, it might get in the way of your daily activities. If you're a woman, you might feel pain during your period . It could also happen when you have sex. Pelvic pain can be a sign that there is a problem with one of the organs in your pelvic area, such as the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, cervix, or vagina. If you're a man, the cause could be problem with the prostate . In men and women, it could be a symptom of infection, or a problem with the urinary tract, lower intestines, rectum, muscle, or bone. Some women have more than one cause of pelvic pain at the same time. You might have to have lab, imaging, or other medical tests to find the cause of the pain. The treatment will depend on the cause, how bad the pain is, and how often it occurs. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

Problems with the penis can cause pain and affect a man's sexual function and fertility. 
Penis disorders include: Erectile dysfunction - inability to get or keep an 
erection Priapism - a painful erection that does not go away Peyronie's disease - bending of the penis during an erection due to a hard lump 
called a plaque Balanitis - inflammation of the skin covering the head of the penis, most often in 
men and boys who have not been circumcised Penile cancer - a rare form of cancer, highly curable when caught early

Puberty is the time in life when a boy or girl becomes sexually mature. It is a process that usually happens between ages 10 and 14 for girls and ages 12 and 16 for boys.  It causes physical changes, and affects boys and girls differently. In girls: The first sign of puberty is usually breast development. Then hair grows in the pubic area and armpits. Menstruation (or a period) usually happens last. In boys: Puberty usually begins with the testicles and penis getting bigger. Then hair grows in the pubic area and armpits. Muscles grow, the voice deepens, and facial hair develops as puberty continues. Both boys and girls may get acne.  They also usually have a growth spurt (a rapid increase in height) that lasts for about 2 or 3 years.  This brings them closer to their adult height, which they reach after puberty. NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

What are pubic lice? Pubic lice (also called crabs) are tiny insects which usually live in the pubic or genital area of humans. They are also sometimes found on other coarse body hair, such as hair on the legs, armpits, mustache, beard, eyebrows, or eyelashes. Pubic lice on the eyebrows or eyelashes of children or teens may be a sign of sexual exposure or abuse . Pubic lice are parasites, and they need to feed on human blood to survive. They are one of the three types of lice that live on humans. The other two types are head lice and body lice . Each type of lice is different, and getting one type does not mean that you will get another type. How do pubic lice spread? Pubic lice move by crawling, because they cannot hop or fly. They usually spread through sexual contact. Occasionally, they may spread through physical contact with a person who has pubic lice, or through contact with clothing, beds, bed linens, or towels that were used by a person with pubic lice. You cannot get pubic lice from animals. Who is at risk for pubic lice? Since they spread mainly through sexual contact, pubic lice are most common in adults. What are the symptoms of pubic lice? The most common symptom of pubic lice is intense itching in the genital area. You may also see nits (lice eggs) or crawling lice. How do you know if you have pubic lice? A diagnosis of a pubic lice usually comes from seeing a louse or nit. But lice and nits can be difficult to find because there may be only a few present. Also, they often attach themselves to more than one hair, and they do not crawl as quickly as head and body lice. Sometimes it takes a magnifying lens to see the lice or nits. People who have pubic lice should also be checked for other sexually transmitted infections (STIs), and their sexual partners should also be checked for pubic lice. What are the treatments for pubic lice? The main treatment for pubic lice is a lice-killing lotion. Options include a lotion that contains permethrin or a mousse containing pyrethrins and piperonyl butoxide. These products are available over-the-counter without a prescription. They are safe and effective when you use them according to the instructions. Usually one treatment will get rid of the lice. If not, you may need another treatment after 9-10 days. There are other lice-killing medicines that are available with a prescription from your health care provider. You should also wash your clothes, bedding, and towels with hot water, and dry them using the hot cycle of the dryer. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy . If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start. Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides. Use good hygiene , including handwashing. If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures.

Sexuality is a big part of being human. Love, affection and sexual intimacy all play a role in healthy relationships. They also contribute to your sense of well-being. A number of disorders can affect the ability to have or enjoy sex  in both men and women . Factors that can affect sexual health include: Fear of unplanned pregnancy Concerns about infertility Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Chronic diseases such as cancer or heart disease Medicines that affect sexual desire or performance

What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are infections that are passed from one person to another through sexual contact. They are usually spread during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. But sometimes they can spread through other sexual contact involving the penis, vagina, mouth, or anus. This is because some STIs, like herpes and HPV, are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Some STIs can be passed from a pregnant person to the baby, either during pregnancy or when giving birth. Other ways that some STIs may be spread include during breastfeeding , through blood transfusions , or by sharing needles. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis What causes sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs can be caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites . Who is affected by sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Most STIs affect both men and women, but in many cases the health problems they cause can be more severe for 
women. If an STI is passed to a baby, it can cause serious health problems. What are the symptoms of sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? STIs don't always cause symptoms or may only cause mild symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection and not know it. And even without symptoms, STIs can still be harmful and may be passed on during sex. If there are symptoms, they could include: Unusual discharge from the penis or vagina Sores or warts on the genital area Painful or frequent urination (peeing) Itching and redness in the genital area Blisters or sores in or around the mouth Abnormal vaginal odor Anal itching, soreness, or bleeding Abdominal (belly) pain Fever How are sexually transmitted infections (STIs) diagnosed? If you are sexually active, you should talk to your health care provider about your risk for STIs and whether you need to be tested. This is especially important since many STIs do not usually cause symptoms. Some STIs may be diagnosed during a physical exam or through STI testing . Some tests involve a microscopic examination of a sore or fluid swabbed from the vagina, penis, or anus. Blood tests can diagnose other types of STIs. What are the treatments for sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Antibiotics can treat STIs that are caused by bacteria or parasites. There is no cure for STIs caused by viruses, but antiviral medicines can often help with the symptoms and lower your risk of spreading the infection. It's important to get treatment if you have an STI. Some types of STIs can cause serious health problems if they are not treated. Can sexually transmitted infections (STIs) be prevented? The surest way to protect yourself against STIs is to not have sex. If you do decide to have sex, you can lower your risk of getting an STI by: Having you and your partner tested for STIs before having sex. Using a condom every time you have sex. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading STIs. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Reducing your number of sex partners. You might even consider "mutual monogamy" with just one partner. This means that you agree to be sexually active only with them, and they agree to be sexually active only with you. But first you should both get tested to make sure that you don't already have an STI. Getting vaccinated against HPV and hepatitis B .

Many men have sexual problems. They become more common as men age.  Problems can include: Erectile dysfunction Reduced or lost interest in sex Problems with ejaculation Low testosterone Stress, illness, medicines, or emotional problems may also be factors.  Occasional problems with sexual function are common. If problems last more than a few months or cause distress for you or your partner, you should see your health care provider.

There are many problems that can keep a woman from enjoying sex. They include: Lack of sexual desire Inability to become aroused Lack of orgasm, or sexual climax Painful intercourse These problems may have physical or psychological causes. Physical causes may include conditions like diabetes, heart disease, nerve disorders, or hormone problems. Some drugs can also affect desire and function. Psychological causes may include work-related stress and anxiety. They may also include depression or concerns about marriage or relationship problems. For some women, the problem results from past sexual trauma. Occasional problems with sexual function are common. If problems last more than a few months or cause distress for you or your partner, you should see your health care provider.

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by bacteria. It infects the genital area, lips, mouth, or anus of both men and women. You usually get syphilis from sexual contact with someone who has it. It can also pass from mother to baby during pregnancy. The early stage of syphilis usually causes a single, small, painless sore. Sometimes it causes swelling in nearby lymph nodes. If you do not treat it, syphilis usually causes a non-itchy skin rash, often on your hands and feet. Many people do not notice symptoms for years. Symptoms can go away and come back. The sores caused by syphilis make it easier to get or give someone HIV during sex. If you are pregnant, syphilis can cause complications, or you could lose your baby. In rare cases, syphilis causes serious health problems and even death. Syphilis is easy to cure with antibiotics if you catch it early. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not completely eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading syphilis. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is teen sexual health? Teen sexual health is about how sex affects your physical and emotional health. It means knowing how to form healthy relationships and making decisions about sex that are right for you. As your body changes during puberty , how you think, feel, and interact with others also changes. You may have new feelings and thoughts about sex. Understanding who you're becoming as a sexual young adult is also part of teen sexual health. For some teens, that includes understanding gender identity, gender expression, and sexual orientation . For all teens, taking responsibility for sexual health is part of growing up. Whether you choose to have sex or wait, responsibility includes knowing about: Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Birth control What a healthy relationship is What are sexually transmitted infections (STIs)? Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), or sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), are caused by bacteria , viruses , and parasites that spread from person to person, usually during vaginal, oral, or anal sex. Some STIs are spread by skin-to-skin contact. Without treatment, some STIs can cause long-term health problems. There are more than 20 types of STIs, including: Chlamydia Genital herpes Gonorrhea HIV HPV (human papillomavirus) Pubic lice Syphilis Trichomoniasis STIs don't always cause symptoms. So it is possible to have an infection without knowing it and then pass it on to someone else. The only way to know for sure whether you have an STI is to get tested . How can I reduce my chances of getting a sexually transmitted infection (STI)? The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have vaginal, oral, or anal sex. Saying "no" to sex is the right choice for many teens. If you decide to have sex, "safer sex" practices will lower your chance of getting an STI. They include: Talking with your partner about preventing STIs and getting tested before having sex. If you can't talk about STIs, you aren't ready to have sex. Getting the HPV vaccine. You can be vaccinated between ages 9 and 26. Using condoms correctly every time you have vaginal, oral, or anal sex: External (male) latex condoms provide the best protection against STIs. If you or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. Internal (female) condoms, made of nitrile, are placed inside the body (vagina or anus). They may be less effective against STIs than latex external condoms. Don't use both type of condoms together because that increases the chance they'll rip Use a dental dam (a square piece of latex, polyurethane, or nitrile) to protect the mouth during oral sex Having sex with only one person who has sex only with you (mutual monogamy). But first, both of you should get tested for STIs. Not mixing alcohol or drugs with sex. You need to think clearly to make safer choices about sex. How can I reduce the chance of pregnancy? The only sure way to avoid pregnancy is not to have vaginal sex. If you decide to have vaginal sex, birth control can help prevent pregnancy. There are many types of birth control that work in different ways.  Your health care provider can help you choose birth control that's best for you. Condoms are the only birth control method that protects against STIs. But condoms alone aren't the most effective form of birth control. It's safest to use condoms with another form of birth control to prevent both STIs and pregnancy. What is a healthy relationship? Healthy sex starts with a healthy relationship, so it's important to take an honest look at how you and your partner treat each other. Your relationship may be healthy if it includes: Respect. You and your partner value each other's feelings. Neither of you pressure the other to do things they don't want to do. Trust and honesty. You always tell the truth and trust your partner to do the same. Good communication. You feel safe talking openly about your feelings, STIs, and other relationships. And you both listen. Your relationship may be unhealthy if it includes: Jealousy and control. One of you wants to make all the decisions and tries to keep the other from spending time with their friends and family. Disrespect. One of you makes fun of the other person's ideas and feelings. Pressure. One of you tries to bully the other into doing sexual things they don't want to do. Violence . Hitting, shoving, grabbing, and sexual assault should never be part of a relationship. If you don't know how to end a violent relationship, get help. Your decisions about sex can affect your future health. Make sure that you know the facts so you can decide what is right for you.

Testicles, or testes, make male hormones and sperm. They are two egg-shaped organs inside the scrotum, the loose sac of skin behind the penis. It's easy to injure your testicles because they are not protected by bones or muscles. Men and boys should wear athletic supporters when they play sports. You should examine your testicles monthly and seek medical attention for lumps, redness, pain or other changes. Testicles can get inflamed or infected. They can also develop cancer. Testicular cancer is rare and highly treatable. It usually happens between the ages of 15 and 40.

Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a parasite. It spreads from person to person during sex. Many people do not have any symptoms. If you do get symptoms, they usually happen within 5 to 28 days after being infected. It can cause vaginitis in women. Symptoms include: Yellow-green or gray discharge from the vagina Discomfort during sex Vaginal odor Painful urination Itching burning, and soreness of the vagina and vulva Most men do not have symptoms. If they do, they may have: Itching or irritation inside the penis Burning after urination or ejaculation Discharge from the penis Trichomoniasis can increase the risk of getting or spreading other sexually transmitted infections. Pregnant women with trichomoniasis are more likely to give birth too early , and their babies are more likely have a low birth weight . Lab tests can tell if you have the infection. Treatment is with antibiotics . If you are infected, you and your partner must be treated. Correct usage of latex condoms greatly reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of catching or spreading trichomoniasis. If your or your partner is allergic to latex , you can use polyurethane condoms. The most reliable way to avoid infection is to not have anal, vaginal, or oral sex. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What kind of medical care would you want if you were too ill or hurt to express your wishes? Advance directives are legal documents that allow you to spell out your decisions about end-of-life care ahead of time. They give you a way to tell your wishes to family, friends, and health care professionals and to avoid confusion later on. A living will tells which treatments you want if you are dying or permanently unconscious. You can accept or refuse medical care. You might want to include instructions on: The use of dialysis and breathing machines If you want to be resuscitated if your breathing or heartbeat stops Tube feeding Organ or tissue donation A durable power of attorney for health care is a document that names your health care proxy. Your proxy is someone you trust to make health decisions for you if you are unable to do so. NIH: National Cancer Institute

A caregiver gives care to someone who needs help taking care of themselves. It can be rewarding. It may help to strengthen connections to a loved one. You may feel fulfillment from helping someone else. But sometimes caregiving can be stressful and even overwhelming. This can be especially true when caring for someone with Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD is an illness that changes the brain. It causes people to lose the ability to remember, think, and use good judgment. They also have trouble taking care of themselves. Over time, as the disease gets worse, they will need more and more help. As a caregiver, it is important for you to learn about AD. You will want to know what happens to the person during the different stages of the disease. This can help you plan for the future, so that you will have all of the resources you will need to be able to take care of your loved one. As a caregiver for someone with AD, your responsibilities can include: Getting your loved one's health, legal, and financial affairs in order. If possible, include them in the planning while they can still make decisions. Later you will need to take over managing their finances and paying their bills. Evaluating their house and making sure it's safe for their needs Monitoring their ability to drive. You may want to hire a driving specialist who can test their driving skills. When it is no longer safe for your loved one to drive, you need to make sure that they stop. Encouraging your loved one to get some physical activity . Exercising together may make it more fun for them. Making sure that your loved one has a healthy diet Helping with daily tasks like bathing, eating, or taking medicine Doing housework and cooking Running errands such as shopping for food and clothes Driving them to appointments Providing company and emotional support Arranging medical care and making health decisions As you care for your loved one with AD, don't ignore your own needs. Caregiving can be stressful, and you need to take care of your own physical and mental health . At some point, you will not be able to do everything on your own. Make sure that you get help when you need it. There are many different services available, including: Home care services Adult day care services Respite services, which provide short-term care for the person with AD Federal and state government programs that can provide financial support and services Assisted living facilities Nursing homes , some of which have special memory care units for people with AD Palliative and hospice care You might consider hiring a geriatric care manager. They are specially trained professionals who can help you to find the right services for your needs. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Bereavement is the period of grief and mourning after a death. When you grieve, it's part of the normal process of reacting to a loss. You may experience grief as a mental, physical, social or emotional reaction. Mental reactions can include anger, guilt, anxiety, sadness and despair. Physical reactions can include sleeping problems, changes in appetite, physical problems or illness. How long bereavement lasts can depend on how close you were to the person who died, if the person's death was expected and other factors. Friends, family and faith may be sources of support. Grief counseling or grief therapy is also helpful to some people. NIH: National Cancer Institute

What is bullying? Bullying is when a person or group repeatedly harms someone on purpose. It can be physical, social, and/or verbal. It is harmful to both the victims and the bullies, and it always involves: Aggressive behavior. A difference in power, meaning that the victim is weaker or is seen as weaker. For example, bullies may try to use physical strength, embarrassing information, or popularity to harm others. Repetition, meaning it happens more than once or that it probably will happen again What are the types of bullying? There are three types of bullying: Physical bullying involves hurting a person's body or belongings. Examples include hitting, kicking, and stealing or breaking someone's stuff. Social bullying (also called relational bullying) hurts someone's reputation or relationships. Some examples are spreading rumors, embarrassing someone in public, and making someone feel left out. Verbal bullying is saying or writing mean things, including name-calling, taunting, and threatening What is cyberbullying? Cyberbullying is bullying that happens through text messages or online. It could be through emails, social media, forums, or gaming. Some examples are: Posting rumors on social media Sharing embarrassing pictures or videos online Sharing someone else's private information online (doxing) Making threats against someone online Creating fake accounts and posting information to embarrass someone Certain types of cyberbullying can be illegal. The laws on cyberbullying are different from state to state. How is cyberbullying different from bullying? Cyberbullying is a type of bullying, but there are some differences between the two. Cyberbullying can be: Anonymous - people can hide their identities when they are online or using a cell phone Persistent - people can send messages instantly, at any time of the day or night Permanent - a lot of electronic communication is permanent and public, unless it's reported and removed. A bad online reputation can affect getting into college, getting a job, and other areas of life. This applies to the bully as well. Hard to notice - teachers and parents may not overhear or see cyberbullying taking place Which children are more likely to be bullied? Children are more likely to be bullied if they: Are seen as different from their peers, such as being overweight or underweight, dressing differently, or being of a different race/ethnicity Are seen as weak Have depression , anxiety , or low self-esteem Don't have many friends or are less popular Don't socialize well with others Have an intellectual or developmental disability Which children are more likely to be bullies? There are two types of children who are more likely to bully others: Children who are well-connected to peers, have social power, are overly worried about popularity, and like to be in charge of others Children who are more isolated from peers, may be depressed or anxious, have low self-esteem, are easily pressured by peers, and have trouble understanding other people's feelings There are certain factors that make someone more likely to be a bully. They include: Being aggressive or easily frustrated Having trouble at home, such as violence or bullying in the home or having uninvolved parents Having trouble following rules Seeing violence positively Having friends who bully others What are the effects of bullying? Bullying is a serious problem that causes harm. And it doesn't just hurt the person who is being bullied; it can also be harmful for the bullies and for any kids who witness the bullying. Kids who are bullied can have problems at school and with their mental and physical health. They are at risk for: Depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem. These problems sometimes last into adulthood. Health complaints, including headaches and stomachaches Lower grades and test scores Missing and dropping out of school Kids who bully others have a higher risk for substance use, problems in school, and violence later in life. Kids who witness bullying are more likely to abuse drugs or alcohol and have mental health problems. They may also miss or skip school. What are the signs of being bullied? Often, kids who are being bullied don't report it. They may fear a backlash from the bully, or they may think that no one cares. Sometimes they feel too ashamed to talk about it. So it is important to know the signs of a bullying problem: Depression, loneliness, or anxiety Low self-esteem Headaches, stomachaches, or poor eating habits Disliking school, not wanting to go to school, or getting worse grades than before Self-destructive behaviors, such as running away from home, harming themselves , or talking about suicide Unexplained injuries Lost or destroyed clothing, books, electronics, or jewelry Trouble sleeping or frequent nightmares Sudden loss of friends or avoidance of social situations How do you help someone who is being bullied? To help a child who is being bullied, support the child and address the bullying behavior: Listen and focus on the child. Learn what's been going on and show you want to help. Assure the child that bullying is not his/her fault Know that kids who are bullied may struggle with talking about it. Consider referring them to a school counselor, psychologist, or other mental health service. Give advice about what to do. This may involve role-playing and thinking through how the child might react if the bullying occurs again. Work together to resolve the situation and protect the bullied child. The child, parents, and school or organization should be part of the solution. Follow up. Bullying may not end overnight. Make sure that the child knows that you are committed to making it stop. Make sure that the bully knows that his or her behavior is wrong and harms others Show kids that bullying is taken seriously. Make it clear to everyone that the bullying will not be tolerated. Department of Health and Human Services

What is a caregiver? A caregiver gives care to someone who needs help taking care of themselves. The person who needs help may be a child, an adult, or an older adult. They may need help because of an injury, chronic illness, or disability . Some caregivers are informal caregivers. They are usually family members or friends. Other caregivers are paid professionals. Caregivers may give care at home or in a hospital or other health care setting. Sometimes they are caregiving from a distance. The types of tasks that caregivers do may include: Helping with daily tasks like bathing, eating, or taking medicine Arranging activities and medical care Making health and financial decisions How does caregiving affect the caregiver? Caregiving can be rewarding. It may help to strengthen connections to a loved one. You may feel fulfillment from helping someone else. But caregiving may also be stressful and sometimes even overwhelming. Caregiving may involve meeting complex demands without any training or help. You may also be working and have children or others to care for. To meet all of the demands, you might be putting your own needs and feelings aside. But that's not good for your long-term health. But you need to make sure that you are also taking care of yourself. What is caregiver stress? Many caregivers are affected by caregiver stress . This is the stress that comes from the emotional and physical strain of caregiving. The signs include: Feeling overwhelmed Feeling alone, isolated, or deserted by others Sleeping too much or too little Gaining or losing a lot of weight Feeling tired most of the time Losing interest in activities you used to enjoy Becoming easily irritated or angered Feeling worried or sad often Having headaches or body aches often Turning to unhealthy behaviors like smoking or drinking too much alcohol How can caregiver stress affect my health? Long-term caregiver stress may put you at risk for many different health problems. Some of these problems can be serious. They include: Depression and anxiety A weak immune system Excess weight and obesity Chronic diseases such as heart disease , cancer, diabetes , or arthritis . Depression and obesity can raise the risk of these diseases even more. Problems with short-term memory or paying attention What can I do to prevent or relieve caregiver stress? Taking steps to prevent or relieve caregiver stress may help prevent health problems. Remember that if you feel better, you can take better care of your loved one. It will also be easier to focus on the rewards of caregiving. Some ways to help yourself include: Learning better ways to help your loved one. For examples, hospitals offer classes that can teach you how to care for someone with an injury or illness. Finding caregiving resources in your community to help you. Many communities have adult daycare services or respite services. Using one of these can give you a break from your caregiving duties. Asking for and accepting help. Make a list of ways others can help you. Let helpers choose what they would like to do. For instance, someone might sit with the person you care for while you do an errand. Someone else might pick up groceries for you. Joining a support group for caregivers. A support group can allow you to share stories, pick up caregiving tips, and get support from others who face the same challenges as you do. Being organized to make caregiving more manageable. Make to-do lists and set a daily routine. Staying in touch with family and friends. It's important for you to have emotional support. Taking care of your own health. Try to find time to be physically active on most days of the week, choose healthy foods, and get enough sleep . Make sure that you keep up with your medical care such as regular checkups and screenings . Considering taking a break from your job , if you also work and are feeling overwhelmed. Under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act, eligible employees can take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave per year to care for relatives. Check with your human resources office about your options. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

A caregiver gives care to someone who needs help taking care of themselves. The person who needs help may be a child, an adult, or an older adult. They may need help because of an injury or disability .  Or they may have a chronic illness such as Alzheimer's disease or cancer. Some caregivers are informal caregivers. They are usually family members or friends. Other caregivers are paid professionals. Caregivers may give care at home or in a hospital or other health care setting. Sometimes they are caregiving from a distance. The types of tasks that caregivers do may include: Helping with daily tasks like bathing, eating, or taking medicine Doing housework and cooking Running errands such as shopping for food and clothes Driving the person to appointments Providing company and emotional support Arranging activities and medical care Making health and financial decisions Caregiving can be rewarding. It may help to strengthen connections to a loved one. You may feel fulfillment from helping someone else. But caregiving may also be stressful and sometimes even overwhelming. You may be "on call" for 24 hours a day. You may also be working outside the home and taking care of children. So you need to make sure that you are not ignoring your own needs. You have to take care of your own physical and mental health as well. Because when you feel better, you can take better care of your loved one. It will also be easier to focus on the rewards of caregiving. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Child abuse is doing something or failing to do something that results in harm to a 
child or puts a child at risk of harm. Child abuse can be physical, sexual or emotional. Neglect, or not providing for a child's needs, is also a 
form of abuse. Most abused children suffer greater emotional than physical damage. An abused child may 
become depressed. He or she may withdraw, think of suicide or become violent. An older 
child may use drugs or alcohol, try to run away or abuse others. Child abuse is a serious problem. If you suspect a child is being abused or neglected, 
call the police or your local child welfare agency.

What are disabilities? A disability is any condition of your body or mind that makes it more difficult for you to do one or more major life activities and interact with the world around you. There are many types of disabilities, such as those that can affect your: Vision Hearing Movement Thinking Remembering Learning Communicating Development Mental health Social relationships More than 1 in 4 adults in the United States have some type of disability. Even though they all have disabilities, they can have a wide range of needs. For example, even people who have same type of disability can be affected in very different ways. Also, some disabilities are "visible" (easy to see), for example when someone is in a wheelchair. But other disabilities are "invisible" (hidden or not easy to see), such as problems with hearing, thinking, or learning. What causes disabilities? Disabilities can have different causes. Some disabilities are present at birth, while others may happen later in life. Causes of disabilities that are present at birth can include: Disorders in single genes , such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy Disorders of chromosomes, such as Down syndrome Exposures (before birth) to infections or substances , such as drugs, alcohol, or cigarettes Causes of disabilities that happen later in life can include: Injuries, such as spinal cord injuries , traumatic brain injuries (TBIs), and back injuries Chronic (long-lasting) diseases, such as diabetes , heart disease , kidney disease , COPD , and arthritis Cancer Mental health problems Stroke Alzheimer's disease and other causes of dementia How can disabilities affect your health? Having a disability does not mean a person cannot be healthy. In fact, many people with disabilities report that their health as good or better. But they may have or be at risk of health problems related to their disability, called "secondary conditions." These conditions may include: Bowel or bladder problems Chronic pain Diabetes Fatigue Heart disease Injuries Mental health problems, including depression and substance use disorders Overweight and obesity Pressure sores or ulcers Many of these conditions can be prevented, and there are treatments for them. It's also important for people with disabilities to get health care that meets their needs as a whole person, not just as a person with a disability. How can people with disabilities get and stay healthy? Just like for people who don't have a disability, having a healthy lifestyle is important for people who do have a disability. A healthy lifestyle includes: Getting regular physical activity Eating healthy foods in healthy portions Limiting sun exposure and using sunscreen to prevent skin cancer Not smoking, and if needed, getting help to quit smoking Using medicines wisely Not drinking alcohol or drinking in moderation Getting help for any substance use or mental health problems Staying in touch with family and friends What kinds of resources are there for people with disabilities? Managing a disability can sometimes be challenging. There are resources that can help: Assistive devices and mobility aids can make daily tasks easier. Schools can develop plans around the specific needs of a child with a disability. The goal of the plans is to give the child an opportunity to perform at the same level as other children their age. Support networks, such as disability organizations, can help you learn more about resources for you and your family. Support groups can help you connect with other people who have the same disability. They can provide emotional and social support. They are also a place where people can share tips about how to deal with day-to-day challenges. Government programs may provide benefits, job training, employment resources, and protection against discrimination. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Many older people are victims of elder abuse. It is the mistreatment of an older person, usually by a caregiver. It can happen within the family.  It can also happen in assisted living facilities or nursing homes. The mistreatment may be: Physical, sexual, or emotional abuse Neglect or abandonment Financial abuse - stealing of money or belongings Possible signs of elder abuse include unexplained bruises, burns, and injuries. There may also be bed sores and poor hygiene. The person may become withdrawn, agitated, and depressed. There may be a sudden change in the person's financial situation. Elder abuse will not stop on its own. Someone else needs to step in and help. If you think that an older person is in urgent danger, call 911. Otherwise, contact adult protective services. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Planning for the end of life can be difficult.  But by deciding what end-of-life care best suits your needs when you are healthy, you can help those close to you make the right choices when the time comes. End-of-life planning usually includes making choices about the following: The goals of care (for example, whether to use certain medicines during the last days of life) Where you want to spend your final days Which treatments for end-of-life care you wish to receive What type of palliative care and hospice care you wish to receive Advance directives can help make your wishes clear to your family and health care providers.

There are many kinds of families. Some have two parents, while others have a single parent. Sometimes there is no parent and grandparents raise grandchildren. Some children live in foster families, adoptive families, or in stepfamilies. Families are much more than groups of people who share the same genes or the same address. They should be a source of love and support. This does not mean that everyone gets along all the time. Conflicts are a part of family life. Many things can lead to conflict, such as illness, disability, addiction, job loss, school problems, and marital  issues.  Listening to each other and working to resolve conflicts are important in strengthening the family.

Health care can be costly. If you have health insurance , it usually pays at least part of your medical costs. If you don't have insurance or need help with costs that aren't covered, financial assistance might 
be available. Certain government programs and nonprofit organizations can help. You can also discuss 
concerns about paying your medical bills with your health care provider, social worker or the business 
office of your clinic or hospital.

What are the causes of homelessness? Each night, hundreds of thousands of people experience homelessness in the United States. Some of these people experience chronic homelessness, while others have temporarily lost their shelter. The reasons why they are homelessness are complex. They can include a combination of factors such as: Poverty Unemployment Lack of affordable housing Mental and substance use disorders Trauma and violence Intimate partner violence Justice-system involvement Sudden serious illness Divorce Death of a partner or parent Disabilities What is the link between homelessness and health? Poor health can contribute to homelessness. And being homeless can contribute to poor health. Many of the problems that people experiencing homelessness face can make their health worse, including: Limited access to health care Problems getting enough food Trouble staying safe Violence Stress Unsanitary living conditions Exposure to severe weather What are some of the common health problems that people experiencing homelessness have? Some of the common health problems that people experiencing homelessness may have include: HIV Lung diseases , including bronchitis , tuberculosis , and pneumonia Malnutrition Mental health problems Substance use problems Wounds and skin infections Many people experiencing homelessness are dealing with trauma. They may have been abused or assaulted. This includes children, who are at risk for emotional and behavioral problems . Contact your local homelessness assistance agency to get the help you need, such as access to shelters, health centers, and free meals.

What is intimate partner violence (IPV)? Intimate partner violence (IPV) is abuse that happens in a romantic relationship. The intimate partner could be a current or former spouse or dating partner. IPV is also known as domestic violence. IPV may include different types of abuse, such as: Physical violence , when a person hurts or tries to hurt a partner by hitting, kicking, or using another type of physical force. Sexual violence which involves forcing or attempting to force a partner to take part in sexual activity when the partner does not or cannot consent. The sexual activity could include things like sex acts, sexual touching, or non-physical sexual events (e.g., sexting). Emotional abuse , which includes threats, name-calling, put-downs, and humiliation. It can also involve controlling behavior, such as telling a partner how to act or dress and not letting them see family or friends. Economic abuse , also called financial abuse, which involves controlling access to money. Stalking , which is repeated, unwanted contact that causes fear or concern for the safety of the partner. This can include watching or following the partner. The stalker may send repeated, unwanted phone calls or texts. Who is affected by intimate partner violence (IPV)? It is hard to know exactly how common IPV is because it is often not reported. But we do know that anyone can be affected by it. IPV can happen to anyone. It affects people with all levels of income and education. What are the signs that someone is experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? If you think that a loved one might be experiencing IPV, watch for these signs: Does your friend or loved one: Have unexplained cuts or bruises? Avoid friends, family, and favorite activities? Make excuses for their partner's behavior? Look uncomfortable or fearful around their partner? Does your friend or loved one's partner: Yell at or make fun of them? Try to control them by making all the decisions? Check up on them at work or school? Force them to do sexual things they don't want to do? Threaten to hurt themself if the partner wants to break up? What can I do if I am experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? Your safety is the most important concern. If you are in immediate danger, call 911. If you are not in immediate danger, you can: Get medical care if you have been injured or sexually assaulted. Call a helpline for free, anonymous help. You can contact the National Domestic Violence Hotline at 800-799-SAFE (7233) or 800-787-3224 (TTY). You can also chat with them through their website or through text by texting START to 88788. Find out where to get help in your community. Contact local organizations that can help you. Make a safety plan to leave. Intimate partner violence usually does not get better. Think about a safe place for you to go and all of the things that you will need when you leave. Save the evidence. Keep evidence of abuse, such as pictures of your injuries or threatening emails or texts. Make sure that it is in a safe place the abuser cannot access. Talk to someone you trust , such as a family member, a friend, a co-worker, or a spiritual leader. Consider getting a restraining order to protect yourself. How can I help someone who is experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV)? Let your loved one know that being treated this way isn't healthy and that they are not to blame. You should: Call 911 if there is immediate danger. Watch for the signs of abuse. Learn about the signs and keep track of the ones that you see. Find out about local resources. Get the addresses and phone numbers of some local resources in your community. Then you'll be able to share the information if the person is ready for it. Set up a time to talk. Make sure you can have your conversation in a safe, private place. Your loved one's partner may have access to his or her cell phone or computer, so be careful about sharing information over text or email. Be specific about why you are worried. Describe the behaviors that concern you. Be as specific as possible when explaining why you are worried. Plan for safety. If your loved one is ready to leave an abusive partner, help make a plan for getting out of the relationship as safely as possible. An intimate partner violence counselor can help with making a safety plan. Be patient and do not judge. You should talk about your concerns with your loved one, but you need to understand that they may not be ready to talk about it. Let them know that you're available to talk at any time, and that you will listen without judging them.

The field of ethics studies principles of right and wrong. There is hardly an area in medicine that doesn't have an ethical aspect. For example, there are ethical issues relating to
: End of life care : Should a patient receive nutrition ? What about advance directives and resuscitation orders? Abortion : When does life begin? Is it ethical to terminate a pregnancy with a birth defect? Genetic and prenatal testing: What happens if you are a carrier of a defect? What if testing shows that your unborn baby has a defect? Birth control : Should it be available to minors? Is it ethical to harvest embryonic stem cells to treat diseases? Organ donation : Must a relative donate an organ to a sick relative? Your personal health information: who has access to your records ? Patient rights : Do you have the right to refuse treatment? When you talk with your doctor , is it ethical for her to withhold information from you or your family?

If you're a parent, you get plenty of suggestions on how to raise your child. From experts to other parents, people are always ready to offer advice. Parenting tips, parents' survival guides, dos, don'ts, shoulds and shouldn'ts - new ones come out daily. The truth is there is more than one "right" way to be a good parent. Good parenting includes: Keeping your child safe Showing affection and listening to your child Providing order and consistency Setting and enforcing limits Spending time with your child Monitoring your child's friendships and activities Leading by example NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development

You've probably seen your chart at your doctor's office. In fact, you may have charts at several doctors' offices.  If you've been in the hospital, you have a chart there, too. These charts are your medical records. They may be on paper or electronic. To keep track of all this information, it's a good idea to keep your own personal health record. What kind of information would you put in a personal health record? You could start with: Your name, birth date, blood type, and emergency contact information Date of last physical Dates and results of tests and screenings Major illnesses and surgeries, with dates A list of your medicines and supplements, the dosages, and how long you've taken them Any allergies Any chronic diseases Any history of illnesses in your family

What is sexual assault? Sexual assault is any kind of sexual activity, contact, or experience that happens without your consent. That means the sexual activity happens even though you don't agree to it. Sexual assault may happen with: Physical force or threats of force Sexual coercion (being pressured, tricked, threatened, or forced in a nonphysical way) Alcohol or drugs, including date rape drugs Sexual assault may also be called sexual violence or sexual abuse. It affects millions of people each year. Anyone can be a victim of sexual assault. Many victims first experience sexual assault during childhood . Most victims are girls and women. But many boys and men are also victims of sexual assault. If you've been sexually assaulted, it's never your fault. It's something that happens to you. What does sexual assault include? Sexual assault is any unwanted sexual activity, including: Sexual activity with physical contact , which is everything from sexual touching or kissing to rape or attempted rape Sexual activity without physical contact , which includes things that may happen in person, online, or through texts, such as: "Flashing" or exhibitionism (when someone shows you their genitals without asking you for permission) Being forced to look at sexual images or pose for sexual photos Being sent unwanted texts with sexual photos or messages Voyeurism (when someone watches private sexual acts without permission) Getting sexual threats or being sexually harassed (unwelcome sexual comments, requests for sexual favors, or other sexual behavior that's ongoing) Any sexual activity that happens without your consent is sexual assault. What does "consent" mean? Giving your consent means that you clearly and freely say "yes" to sexual activity. Your consent means that you: Know and understand what's going on. Can say what you want to do and don't want to do. Are not underage. Are not being pressured or tricked to do things you don't want to do. Giving consent is not : Silence. Not saying "no" doesn't mean you're saying "yes." Having consented in the past. Having said "yes" to sex with someone in the past doesn't mean that you've agreed to all sexual activity in the future. That's true when you're dating or in a lasting relationship. Being passive and not fighting off an attacker. You cannot give consent if you are: Drugged, drunk, passed out, or asleep. Mentally unable to consent due to illness or disability. Underage (States have different laws about how old you must be to give legal consent to sexual activity.). Sexually coerced. This means that someone is pressuring you to participate in sexual activity. Agreeing to sex under pressure is not giving consent. The pressure may include: Abusing power over you, for example, a boss threatening your job. Making threats to harm people you care about. Making false promises to reward you for sex. Threatening to end a relationship or spread rumors about you. Wearing you down by constantly asking for sex or making you feel guilty or obligated. Who commits sexual assault? Both men and women commit sexual assault. A person who commits sexual assault may be a stranger, but more often it's someone you know, for example: A friend or acquaintance Someone you work with A neighbor A family member A current or past romantic partner, including a spouse What are the possible health effects from sexual assault? Sexual assault may have many health effects. Many of them can affect your lifelong health and well-being. The effects may include: Physical effects such as: Bruises or genital injuries Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Pregnancy Ongoing problems with: Female reproductive health Digestive disorders Your heart Sexual health Psychological effects such as: Depression or anxiety Thoughts about suicide Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Sexual assault victims are more likely to smoke , have  an alcohol use disorder (AUD) , use illegal drugs , and have risky sexual behavior. Girls who experience sexual violence are more likely to become victims of intimate partner violence in adulthood. What can I do if I'm a victim of sexual assault? If you are in danger or need medical care, call 911. If you can, get away from the person who assaulted you and get to a safe place as fast as you can. You can call the National Sexual Assault Hotline at 800-656-HOPE (4673) to connect with a sexual assault service provider in your area who can direct you to local resources. Getting support after a sexual assault may help you cope better and reduce the long-term effects. Victim services like rape crisis centers may provide a safe, healing place where you can find support. Studies show that treatments such as Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TF-CBT) can help victims cope with depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Can sexual assault be prevented? Sexual assault is never the victim's fault. No one who has been assaulted should be blamed for something that they did or did not do. You can take some steps to try to be safer around others: Go to parties with friends. Look out for each other. If a friend seems drunk or drugged, get them to a safe place. Have a plan for how you'll get home, too. Keep control of your drink. Someone could add alcohol or put a drug in it without you knowing. Meet people for the first time in a public place. Listen to your "gut feelings." If you feel uncomfortable around someone, leave. Pay attention to your surroundings. When walking alone, stay in busy well-lit areas. And don't wear headphones; you want to be able to hear what's happening around you. Centers for Disease and Control and Prevention

What is suicide? Suicide is the taking of one's own life. It is a death that happens when someone harms themselves because they want to end their life. A suicide attempt is when someone harms themselves to try to end their life, but they do not die. Suicide is a major public health problem and a leading cause of death in the United States. Both suicide and suicide attempts can have lasting harmful effects: People who survive a suicide attempt may have serious injuries that can affect their long-term health. They may also have depression or other mental health concerns. When people die by suicide, it affects their family, friends, and community. They may feel grief, shock, anger, and guilt. Some may develop post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, or anxiety . They may also be at risk for suicidal thoughts. Who is at risk for suicide? Suicide does not discriminate. It can touch anyone, anywhere, at any time. But there are certain factors that can contribute to the risk of suicide, including: Having attempted suicide before Depression and other mental health disorders Alcohol or drug use disorder Family history of a mental health disorder Family history of an alcohol or drug use disorder Family history of suicide Family violence, including intimate partner violence , child abuse , or sexual abuse Having guns in the home Being in or having recently gotten out of prison or jail Being exposed to others' suicidal behavior, such as a family member, peer, or celebrity Medical illness, including chronic pain Stressful life event, such as a job loss, financial problems, loss of a loved one, a breakup of a relationship, etc. Being between the ages of 15 and 24 years or over age 60 What are the warning signs for suicide? The warning signs for suicide include: Talking about wanting to die or wanting to kill oneself Making a plan or looking for a way to kill oneself, such as searching online Buying a gun or stockpiling pills Feeling empty, hopeless, trapped, or like there's no reason to live Being in unbearable pain Talking about being a burden to others Using more alcohol or drugs Acting anxious or agitated; behaving recklessly Sleeping too little or too much Withdrawing from family or friends or feeling isolated Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge Displaying extreme mood swings Saying good-bye to loved ones, putting affairs in order Some people may tell others about their suicidal thoughts. But others may try to hide them. This can make some of the signs harder to spot. What should I do if I need help or know someone who does? If you or someone you know has the warning signs for suicide, get help right away , especially if there is a change in behavior. If it is an emergency, dial 911. Otherwise there are five steps that you can take: Ask the person if they're thinking about killing themselves. Keep them safe. Find out whether they have a plan for suicide and keep them away from things that they can use to kill themselves. Be there with them. Listen carefully and find out what they are thinking and feeling. Help them connect to resources that can help them, such as through: Calling or texting the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline at 988. Chatting through Lifeline Chat. For veterans, reaching the Veterans Crisis Line by: Calling 988 and then pressing 1. Texting to 838255. Chatting with them. Stay connected. Staying in touch after a crisis can make a difference. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

How well you and your doctor or provider communicate with each other is one of the most important parts of getting good health care. Being prepared can help you make the most of your visit, whether it is in person or through telehealth . Here are some things you can do to make the most of your appointment: Make lists of any allergies you have and all the medicines, herbs , vitamins , and supplements you take. Make a list of the questions and concerns you want to talk about. If you are having any health problems, write down a description of your symptoms. Include information such as when they started, what makes them better, and what makes them worse. Ask a trusted friend or family member to come to the appointment with you. If your doctor or provider doesn't speak your language, call their office ahead of time and ask them to provide an interpreter. During your appointment, take notes about what your doctor or health care provider tells you. Or you could ask your friend or family member to take notes for you. Be honest during your appointment. Don't just say what you think your doctor or provider wants to hear. For example, don't say that you stopped smoking or are eating healthy if it's not true. Your doctor or provider needs to know what is really going on, so they can give you the care and treatments that would be best for you. If you don't understand something your doctor or provider says, ask questions until you do understand. Ask for written instructions if you need them. Learn how to access your medical records, so you can keep track of your test results, diagnoses, treatment plans, and medicines. Ask for your doctor's or provider's contact information and find out the best way to communicate with them. Find out what to do if you need more information later.

Teen violence refers to harmful behaviors that can start early and continue into young adulthood. The young person can be a victim, an offender, or a witness to the violence. Violent acts can include: Bullying Fighting, including punching, kicking, slapping, or hitting Use of weapons such as guns or knives Some violent acts can cause more emotional harm than physical harm. Others can lead to serious injury or even death. An important risk factor for violence in teens is the behavior of their friends and classmates. You should know who your kids hang out with and encourage healthy behavior and relationships. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Almost every day, new findings from medical research are published in scientific journals. These journal articles often become sources for news stories. They can be important tools in helping you manage your health. But it's not always easy to understand them and know what they mean for your life. For example: What you hear about a study may not explain how it fits into the bigger picture. Sometimes the results of one study seem to disagree with the results of another study. That could be because the studies could have different designs and asked different questions. The news stories don't always explain this. Sometimes the studies are very small, and researchers need to do more studies to confirm the results. But the news stories about these small studies may not highlight this. So it's important to think carefully when reading or listening to reports of new medical findings. Here are some questions that can help you evaluate that information : Was the study in animals or humans? Getting certain results in animals may not mean that you get those same results in humans. Were the people in the study similar to you in ways that may matter, such as age, race, or sex? How big was the study? Larger studies may get more reliable results than smaller studies. How long did the study last? For example, studies testing medicines need to be long enough to show long-term benefits or risks. What kind of study was it? Clinical trials , especially randomized controlled trials, give the clearest information about whether a treatment is effective and safe in humans. In randomized controlled trials, the people in the study are randomly divided into separate groups that get different treatments. This helps prevent bias in the results. Where was the research done? If a new treatment was being tested, what were the side effects? How common were they? How do the results from the study compare with previous studies? If the new study had different results, then more studies would be needed to confirm these results. Who paid for the research? Sometimes the people paying for the research could profit financially if the study gets certain results. Who is reporting the results? Do they have a certain bias? It can be helpful to stay informed about new medical findings. But it's good to have some skepticism. Keep these questions in mind the next time you hear about a big new medical breakthrough.

We have all heard it many times before -- regular exercise is good for you, and it can help you manage your weight. But if you are like many Americans, you are busy, you sit most of the day at your job, and you haven't yet changed your exercise habits. The good news is that it's never too late to start. You can start slowly, and find ways to fit more physical activity into your life. To get the most benefit, you should try to get the recommended amount of physical activity for your age. If you can do that, the payoff is that you will feel better, may help prevent or control many diseases, and will likely even live longer. What are the health benefits of exercise? Regular exercise and physical activity may: Help you get to and stay at a healthy weight . Along with diet, exercise plays an important role in maintaining a healthy weight and preventing obesity . If you are at a healthy weight, you can maintain it if the calories you eat and drink are equal to the amount of energy you burn. To lose weight, you need to use more calories than you eat and drink. Reduce your risk of heart diseases. Exercise strengthens your heart and improves your circulation. The increased blood flow raises the oxygen levels in your body. This helps lower your risk of heart diseases such as coronary artery disease and heart attack .  Regular exercise can also lower high blood pressure , cholesterol , and triglyceride levels, all of which are risk factors for heart disease. Help your body manage blood glucose (blood sugar) and insulin levels. Exercise can lower your blood glucose levels and help your insulin work better. This can reduce your risk of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes . And if you already have one of these diseases, exercise can help you to manage it. Help you manage a chronic health condition. For example, regular physical activity may help reduce pain and improve function in adults with arthritis . It can also help support daily living activities for people with disabilities . This may help them to be more independent. Help you quit smoking . Exercise may make it easier to quit smoking by reducing your cravings and withdrawal symptoms. It can also help limit the weight you might gain when you stop smoking. Improve your mental health and mood. During exercise, your body releases chemicals that can improve your mood and make you feel more relaxed. This can help you deal with stress , manage anxiety , and reduce your risk of depression . Help keep your thinking, learning, and judgment skills sharp as you age. Exercise stimulates your body to release proteins and other chemicals that improve the structure and function of your brain. Strengthen your bones and muscles. Regular exercise can help kids and teens build strong bones. Later in life, it can also slow the loss of bone density that comes with age. Doing muscle-strengthening activities can help you increase or maintain your muscle mass and strength. Reduce your risk of some cancers, including colon , breast , uterine , bladder , esophageal , kidney , stomach , and lung cancer. There are different ways that physical activity may lower the risk of these cancers. For example, it can strengthen your immune system and reduce inflammation in your body. It also helps prevent obesity, which is a risk factor for many cancers. Reduce your risk of falls . For older adults, doing balance and muscle-strengthening activities can help reduce your risk of falling. Improve your sleep. Exercise can help you to fall asleep faster and stay asleep longer. Improve your sexual health. Regular exercise may lower the risk of erectile dysfunction (ED) in men. For those who already have ED, exercise may help improve their sexual function. In women, exercise may increase sexual arousal. Increase your chances of living longer. Studies show that physical activity can reduce your risk of dying early from the leading causes of death, like heart disease and certain cancers. How can I make exercise a part of my regular routine? Here are some tips to help you make exercise part of your regular routine: Make everyday activities more active. Even small changes can help. You can take the stairs instead of the elevator. Walk down the hall to a coworker's office instead of sending an email. Wash the car yourself. Park further away from your destination. Be active with friends and family. Having a workout partner may make you more likely to enjoy exercise. You can also plan social activities that involve exercise. You might also consider joining an exercise group or class, such as a dance class, hiking club, or volleyball team. Keep track of your progress. Keeping a log of your activity or using a fitness tracker may help you set goals and stay motivated. Make exercise more fun. Try listening to music or watching TV while you exercise. Also, mix things up a little bit - if you stick with just one type of exercise, you might get bored. Try doing a combination of activities. Find activities that you can do even when the weather is bad. You can walk in a mall, climb stairs, or work out in a gym even if the weather stops you from exercising outside. Remember that some physical activity is better than none. Do what you can! Even 5 minutes of physical activity has real health benefits.

College life involves excitement, along with new challenges, risks, and responsibilities. You are meeting new people, learning new things, and making your own decisions. It can sometimes be stressful.  You have to deal with pressures related to food, drink, appearance, drugs, and sexual activity. There are steps you can take to stay healthy and safe while you're in college: Eat a balanced diet Get enough sleep Get regular physical activity Maintain your health with checkups and vaccinations If you decide to have sex, practice safe sex Make smart choices about alcohol and drugs Get help if you are stressed or depressed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Many Americans use medical treatments that are not part of mainstream medicine. When you are using these types of care, it may be called complementary, integrative, or alternative medicine. Complementary medicine is used together with mainstream medical care. An example is using acupuncture to help with side effects of cancer treatment. When health care providers and facilities offer both types of care, it is called integrative medicine. Alternative medicine is used instead of mainstream medical care. The claims that non-mainstream practitioners make can sound promising. However, researchers do not know how safe many of these treatments are or how well they work. Studies are underway to determine the safety and usefulness of many of these practices. To minimize the health risks of a non-mainstream treatment: Discuss it with your doctor. It might have side effects or interact with other medicines. Find out what the research says about it Choose practitioners carefully Tell all of your doctors and practitioners about all of the different types of treatments you use NIH: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

It's important to take care of your mouth and teeth starting in childhood . If you don't, you could have problems with your teeth and gums - like cavities or even tooth loss. Here's how to keep your mouth and teeth healthy: Brush your teeth twice a day with a fluoride toothpaste Clean between your teeth every day with floss or another type of between-the-teeth cleaner Snack smart - limit sugary snacks Don't smoke or chew tobacco See your dentist or oral health professional regularly NIH: National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research

If you are overweight or have obesity , losing weight can improve your health. It might also help you prevent weight-related diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes, arthritis and some cancers.  A healthy diet is an important part of a weight-loss program. It: May include fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products May include lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, eggs and nuts Goes easy on saturated fats, trans fat, cholesterol, salt (sodium), and added sugars The key to losing weight is to burn more calories than you eat and drink. A diet can help you to do this through portion control.  There are many different types of diets. Some, like the Mediterranean diet, describe a traditional way of eating from a specific region. Others, like the DASH eating plan or a diet to lower cholesterol , were designed for people who have certain health problems. But they may also help you to lose weight. There are also fad or crash diets that severely restrict calories or the types of food you are allowed to eat. They may sound promising, but they rarely lead to permanent weight loss. They also may not provide all of the nutrients your body needs. In addition to a diet, adding exercise into your daily life can help you to lose weight. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Ergonomics looks at what kind of work you do, what tools you use and your whole job environment.  The aim is to find the best fit between you and your job conditions. Examples of ergonomic changes to your work might include: Adjusting the position of your computer keyboard to prevent carpal tunnel syndrome Being sure that the height of your desk chair allows your feet to rest flat on floor Learning the right way to lift heavy objects to prevent back injuries Using handle coatings or special gloves to suppress vibrations from power tools Making sure that you have good posture in whatever you do, whether it is sitting in front of a computer, standing at a checkout, or walking around a warehouse No matter what the job is, the goal is to make sure that you are safe, comfortable, and less prone to work-related injuries.

Why do I need to evaluate health information? Health information is easy to find. But finding reliable health information takes a little effort. Some of the health information you get from newspapers, magazines, books, TV, the Internet, and social media is up to date and trustworthy. But some is not. That's why it's important to evaluate health information for yourself. But how can you tell the good from the bad? There are two key steps: Ask questions before you trust what you read or hear. Discuss the information you find with your health care provider before you rely on it. You may have found good information, but your provider can tell you whether it's good for you . How can I evaluate health information on the Internet? Asking a few questions will help you decide if you can trust a website. You can usually find most of the answers on the site's "About Us" page.  If you can't find information about who runs the website, the site may not be trustworthy, and their health information may be unreliable. Some questions to ask are: Who runs the site? Can you trust them to provide balanced, accurate information? Trustworthy sites provide a way to contact the owners with questions or feedback. In general, you'll find good health information on websites run by: Federal government agencies. Medical schools. Large professional or nonprofit organizations. For example, the American College of Cardiology (a professional organization) and the American Heart Association (a nonprofit) and are both reliable sources of information on heart health. What's the purpose of the site? Is it to: Inform the public? Sell products or services? Promote the opinions of a person or group? A trustworthy website has one goal: To give you good information. Who pays for the site? If the site is funded by ads, they should be clearly marked as advertisements.  Watch out for ads designed to look like neutral health information. If a business pays for the site, the health information may favor that business and its products. Is the health information high quality? Good health information doesn't promote one treatment over another. It gives you balanced facts based on research. So, beware of dramatic writing, promises of cures, and claims that sound too good to be true. Those could be signs of a health fraud scam . To evaluate the quality of a website's information, ask: How is the information selected and reviewed to make sure it's accurate? Check the "About Us" page to see if the site has: An editorial board of health experts A content review process A selection policy for content Information about their writers' qualifications, which may be listed at the bottom of the articles Where does the information come from? The content pages should have links or references to the sources of the information. Is the information up to date? Content pages should include dates when the information was written, reviewed, or updated. How does the website use your personal information? Look for a privacy policy section to see how your personal information will be used. Don't share information about yourself unless you're comfortable with any risks involved. When you find a website that seems to be trustworthy, don't stop there. Look to see if other reliable sites have similar health information. How can I evaluate health information on social media? A social media post may come from someone you know, but that doesn't guarantee it's good information. Many of the questions you use to evaluate a website also work for social media too. Ask where the information comes from, why it exists, and if anyone is funding it. If you're not sure whether the information you see on social media is trustworthy, don"t share it with others. How can I evaluate health stories in the news? Some news stories about medical research may not include all the facts you need to know.  Ask these questions: Does the story say whether the research involved people or animals? If it was people, how many people were in the study and who were they? How long was the study? What type of study was it? Who paid for the research? If you learn a few tips for understanding medical research , you'll be able to decide if a news story may apply to your health. Then you can discuss the information with your provider. How can I evaluate health information in books? To evaluate health information in books, ask: How old is the book? Is the author an expert on the subject? Does the book offer different points of view or just those of the author? Has the book been reviewed by other experts? Does the book list the sources of the content? After you evaluate health information, talk with your provider before using it to make decisions that may affect your health. NIH: National Library of Medicine

Regular exercise is one of the best things you can do for your health. It has many benefits , including improving your overall health and fitness, and reducing your risk for many chronic diseases. There are many different types of exercise; it is important that you pick the right types for you. Most people benefit from a combination of them: Endurance, or aerobic, activities increase your breathing and heart rate. They keep your heart, lungs, and circulatory system healthy and improve your overall fitness. Examples include brisk walking, jogging, swimming, and biking. Strength, or resistance training, exercises make your muscles stronger. Some examples are lifting weights and using a resistance band. Balance exercises can make it easier to walk on uneven surfaces and help prevent falls. To improve your balance, try tai chi or exercises like standing on one leg. Flexibility exercises stretch your muscles and can help your body stay limber. Yoga and doing various stretches can make you more flexible. Fitting regular exercise into your daily schedule may seem difficult at first. But you can start slowly, and break your exercise time into chunks. Even doing ten minutes at a time is fine. You can work your way up to doing the recommended amount of exercise. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Other things that you can do to make the most of your workouts include: Choosing activities that work all the different parts of the body, including your core (muscles around your back, abdomen, and pelvis). Good core strength improves balance and stability and helps to prevent lower back injury. Choosing activities that you enjoy. It's easier to make exercise a regular part of your life if you have fun doing it. Exercising safely , with proper equipment, to prevent injuries . Also, listen to your body and don't overdo it. Giving yourself goals. The goals should challenge you, but also be realistic. It's also helpful to reward yourself when you reach your goals. The rewards could be something big, like new workout gear, or something smaller, such as movie tickets.

Like adults, kids need exercise. Most children need at least an hour of physical activity every day. Regular exercise has many benefits for children. It can help them: Feel less stressed Feel better about themselves Feel more ready to learn in school Keep a healthy weight Build and keep healthy bones, muscles and joints Sleep better at night As kids spend more time watching TV, they spend less time running and playing. Parents should limit TV, video game and computer time.  Parents can set a good example by being active themselves.  Exercising together can be fun for everyone.  Competitive sports can help kids stay fit. Walking or biking to school, dancing, bowling and yoga are some other ways for kids to get exercise.

Exercise and physical activity are good for just about everyone, including older adults. There are four main types and each type is different. Doing them all will give you more benefits .: Endurance, or aerobic, activities increase your breathing and heart rate. Brisk walking or jogging, dancing, swimming, and biking are examples. Strength exercises make your muscles stronger. Lifting weights or using a resistance band can build strength. Balance exercises help prevent falls Flexibility exercises stretch your muscles and can help your body stay limber If you have not been active, you can start slowly and work up to your goal. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Check with your health care provider on what is right for you. NIH: National Institute on Aging

Your family history includes health information about you and your close relatives. Families have many factors in common, including their genes, environment, and lifestyle. Looking at these factors can help you figure out whether you have a higher risk for certain health problems, such as heart disease, stroke, and cancer. Having a family member with a disease raises your risk, but it does not mean that you will definitely get it. Knowing that you are at risk gives you a chance to reduce that risk by following a healthier lifestyle and getting tested as needed. You can get started by talking to your relatives about their health. Draw a family tree and add the health information. Having copies of medical records and death certificates is also helpful. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Regular checkups with your health care provider are different from appointments for sickness or injury. These checkups include physical exams as well as preventive care. Preventative care may include: Screening tests , which are medical tests to check for diseases early, when they may be easier to treat. Which screenings you need will depend on your: Age Sex Overall health Family health history Risks for certain diseases Vaccines , which can improve your health by preventing diseases and other health problems. Education and counseling to help you make informed health decisions. This could include advice about your lifestyle, including your diet, how much exercise you get, and any alcohol, tobacco, or other substances you may be using. To make the most of your next check-up, here are some things to do before you go: Review your family health history Find out if you are due for any general screenings or vaccines Make and bring a list of issues and questions you would like to talk about with your provider Make and bring a list of any medicines, vitamins, supplements that you take Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is health literacy? Health literacy involves the information that people need to be able to make good decisions about health. There are two parts: Personal health literacy is about how well a person can find and understand the health information and services that they need. It is also about using the information and services to make good health decisions. Organizational health literacy is about how well organizations help people find the health information and services that they need. It also includes helping them use that information to make good health decisions. Which factors can affect health literacy? Many different factors can affect a person's health literacy, including their: Knowledge of medical words Understanding of how the health care system works Ability to communicate with health care providers Ability to find health information, which may require computer skills Reading, writing, and number skills Personal factors, such as age, income, education, language abilities, and culture Physical or mental limitations Many of the same people who are at risk for limited health literacy also have health disparities . Health disparities are health differences between different groups of people. These groups may be based on age, race, sex, or other factors. Why is health literacy important? Health literacy is important because it can affect your ability to: Make good decisions about your health. Get the medical care you need. This includes preventative care, which is care that focuses on preventing disease and keeping you healthy. Take your medicines correctly . Manage a disease, especially a chronic (long-term) disease . Lead a healthy lifestyle. One thing that you can do is to make sure that you communicate well with your health care providers . If you don't understand something a provider tells you, ask them to explain it to you so that you understand. You can also ask the provider to write down their instructions.

What is an inactive lifestyle? Being a couch potato. Not exercising. A sedentary or inactive lifestyle. You have probably heard of all of these phrases, and they mean the same thing: a lifestyle with a lot of sitting and lying down, with very little to no exercise. In the United States and around the world, people are spending more and more time doing sedentary activities. During our leisure time, we are often sitting: while using a computer or other device, watching TV, or playing video games. Many of our jobs have become more sedentary, with long days sitting at a desk. And the way most of us get around involves sitting - in cars, on buses, and on trains. How does an inactive lifestyle affect your body? When you have an inactive lifestyle,: You burn fewer calories. This makes you more likely to gain weight. You may lose muscle strength and endurance, because you are not using your muscles as much Your bones may get weaker and lose some mineral content Your metabolism may be affected, and your body may have more trouble breaking down fats and sugars Your immune system may not work as well You may have poorer blood circulation Your body may have more inflammation You may develop a hormonal imbalance What are the health risks of an inactive lifestyle? Having an inactive lifestyle can be one of the causes of many chronic diseases. By not getting regular exercise, you raise your risk of: Obesity Heart diseases , including coronary artery disease and heart attack High blood pressure High cholesterol Stroke Metabolic syndrome Type 2 diabetes Certain cancers, including colon , breast , and uterine cancers Osteoporosis and falls Increased feelings of depression and anxiety Having a sedentary lifestyle can also raise your risk of premature death. And the more sedentary you are, the higher your health risks are. How can I get started with exercise? If you have been inactive, you may need to start slowly. You can keep adding more exercise gradually. The more you can do, the better. But try not to feel overwhelmed, and do what you can. Getting some exercise is always better than getting none. Eventually, your goal can be to get the recommended amount of exercise for your age and health. There are many different ways to get exercise; it is important to find the types that are best for you . You can also try to add activity to your life in smaller ways, such as at home and at work. How can I be more active around the house? There are some ways you can be active around your house: Housework, gardening, and yard work are all physical work. To increase the intensity, you could try doing them at a more vigorous pace. Keep moving while you watch TV. Lift hand weights, do some gentle yoga stretches, or pedal an exercise bike. Instead of using the TV remote, get up and change the channels yourself. Work out at home with a workout video (on your TV or on the internet) Go for a walk in your neighborhood. It can be more fun if you walk your dog, walk your kids to school, or walk with a friend. Stand up when talking on the phone Get some exercise equipment for your home. Treadmills and elliptical trainers are great, but not everyone has the money or space for one. Less expensive equipment such as yoga balls, exercise mats, stretch bands, and hand weights can help you get a workout at home too. How can I be more active at work? Most of us sit when we are working, often in front of a computer. In fact, less than 20% of Americans have physically active jobs. It can be challenging to fit physical activity into your busy workday, but here are some tips to help you get moving: Get up from your chair and move around at least once an hour Stand when you are talking on the phone Find out whether your company can get you a stand-up or treadmill desk Take the stairs instead of the elevator Use your break or part of your lunch hour to walk around the building Stand up and walk to a colleague's office instead of sending an email Have "walking" or standing meetings with co-workers instead of sitting in a conference room

Screenings are tests that look for diseases before you have symptoms. Screening tests can find diseases early, when they're easier to treat. You can get some screenings in your doctor's office. Others need special equipment, so you may need to go to a different office or clinic. Some conditions that doctors commonly screen for include: Breast cancer and cervical cancer in women Colorectal cancer Diabetes High blood pressure High cholesterol Osteoporosis Overweight and obesity Prostate cancer in men Which tests you need depends on your age, your sex, your family history, and whether you have risk factors for certain diseases.  After a screening test, ask when you will get the results and whom to talk to about them. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

People in the U.S. are living longer, and the number of older adults in the population is growing. As we age, our minds and bodies change. Having a healthy lifestyle can help you deal with those changes. It may also prevent some health problems and  help you to make the most of your life. A healthy lifestyle for older adults includes: Healthy eating . As you age, your dietary needs may change. You may need fewer calories, but you still need to get enough nutrients. A healthy eating plan includes Eating foods that give you lots of nutrients without a lot of extra calories. This includes fruits and vegetables, whole grains, lean meats, low-fat dairy, nuts, and seeds. Avoiding empty calories, such as foods like chips, candy, baked goods, soda, and alcohol Eating foods that are low in cholesterol and fat Drinking enough liquids, so you don't get dehydrated Regular physical activity . Being physically active may help you maintain a healthy weight and avoid chronic health problems. If you have not been active, you can start slowly and work up to your goal. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Check with your health care provider on what is right for you. Staying at a healthy weight . Being either overweight or underweight can lead to health problems. Ask your health care professional what a healthy weight for you may be. Healthy eating and exercise can help you get to that weight. Keeping your mind active. Lots of activities can keep your mind active and improve your memory , including learning new skills, reading, and playing games. Making your mental health a priority. Work on improving your mental health , for example by practicing mediation, relaxation techniques, or gratitude. Know the warning signs of a problem and ask for help if you are struggling. Participating in activities that you enjoy. People who are involved in hobbies and social and leisure activities may be at lower risk for some health problems. Doing things that you enjoy may help you feel happier and improve your thinking abilities. Playing an active role in your health care. Make sure that you get regular checkups and the health screenings that you need. You should know which medicines you are taking, why you need them, and how to take them properly . Not smoking. If you are a smoker, quitting is one of the most important things that you can do for your health. It can lower your risk of several different types of cancer, certain lung diseases, and heart disease. Taking steps to prevent falls . Older adults have a higher risk of falling. They are also more likely to fracture (break) a bone when they fall. Getting regular eye checkups , getting regular physical activity, and making your house safer can lower your risk of falling. Following these tips can help you to stay healthy as you age. Even if you have never done them before, it's never too late to start taking care of your health. If you have questions about these lifestyle changes or need help figuring out how to make them, ask your health care provider.

Many factors affect your health. Some you cannot control, such as your genetic makeup or your age. But you can make changes to your lifestyle. By taking steps toward healthy living, you can help reduce your risk of heart disease, cancer, stroke and other serious diseases: Get the screening tests you need Maintain a healthy weight Eat a variety of healthy foods , and limit calories and saturated fat Be physically active Control your blood pressure and cholesterol Don't smoke Protect yourself from too much sun Drink alcohol in moderation, or don't drink at all Get enough sleep every day Work on improving your mental health , for example by practicing mediation, relaxation techniques, or gratitude Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

An herb is a plant or plant part used for its scent, flavor, or therapeutic properties. Herbal medicines are one type of dietary supplement . They are sold as tablets, capsules, powders, teas, extracts, and fresh or dried plants. People use herbal medicines to try to maintain or improve their health. Many people believe that products labeled "natural" are always safe and good for them. This is not necessarily true. Herbal medicines do not have to go through the testing that drugs do. Some herbs, such as comfrey and ephedra, can cause serious harm. Some herbs can interact with prescription or over-the-counter medicines. If you are thinking about using an herbal medicine, first get information on it from reliable sources. Make sure to tell your health care provider about any herbal medicines you are taking. NIH: National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health

Regular exercise is one of the best things you can do for your health. It has many benefits . It can improve your overall health and fitness and reduce your risk for many chronic diseases.To get the most benefit, here's how much physical activity you should get: For adults: Get at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity each week. Or you could do a combination of the two. : Try to spread your physical activity out over several days of the week. That's better than trying to do it all in one or two days. Some days you may not have long blocks of time to do physical activity. You can try splitting it up into segments of ten minutes or more. Aerobic activities include walking fast, jogging, swimming, and biking Moderate intensity means that while you are doing that activity, you should be able to say a few words in a row but not sing Vigorous intensity means that while you are doing that activity, you won't be able to say more than a few words without stopping for a breath Also, do strengthening activities twice per week. : Strengthening activities include lifting weights, working with exercise bands, and doing sit-ups and pushups Choose activities that work all the different parts of the body - your legs, hips, back, chest, stomach, shoulders, and arms. You should repeat exercises for each muscle group 8 to 12 times per session. For preschool-aged children (ages 3-5): Preschool children should be physically active throughout the day, to help with their growth and development. They should get both structured and unstructured active play. Structured play has a goal and is directed by an adult. Examples include playing a sport or a game. Unstructured play is creative free play, such as playing on a playground. For children and teens: Get 60 minutes or more of physical activity every day. Most of it should be moderate-intensity aerobic activity. : Activities should vary and be a good fit for the child's age and physical development Moderate-intensity aerobic activities include walking, running, skipping, playing on the playground, playing basketball, and biking Also, try to get each of these at least 3 days a week: vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, muscle-strengthening activity, and bone-strengthening activity. : Vigorous-intensity aerobic activities include running, doing jumping jacks, and fast swimming Muscle-strengthening activities include playing on playground equipment, playing tug-of-war, and doing pushups and pull-ups Bone-strengthening activities include hopping, skipping, doing jumping jacks, playing volleyball, and working with resistance bands For older adults, pregnant women, and people with chronic health problems: Older adults , pregnant women, and people who have special health needs should check with their health care provider on how much physical activity they should get and what types of activities they should do. Exercise tips: People who are trying to lose weight may need to get more physical activity. They also need to adjust their diet, so they are burning more calories than they eat and drink. If you have been inactive, you may need to start slowly. You can keep adding more gradually. The more you can do, the better. But try not to feel overwhelmed, and do what you can. Getting some physical activity is always better than getting none. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is type 2 diabetes? If you have diabetes, your blood sugar levels are too high. With type 2 diabetes , this happens because your body does not make enough insulin, or it does not use insulin well (this is called insulin resistance). If you are at risk for type 2 diabetes, you might be able to prevent or delay developing it. Who is at risk for type 2 diabetes? Many Americans are at risk for type 2 diabetes. Your chances of getting it depend on a combination of risk factors such as your genes and lifestyle. The risk factors include: Having prediabetes , which means you have blood sugar levels that are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes Being overweight or having obesity Being age 45 or older A family history of diabetes Being African American, Alaska Native, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander Having high blood pressure Having a low level of HDL (good) cholesterol or a high level of triglycerides A history of diabetes in pregnancy Having given birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more An inactive lifestyle A history of heart disease or stroke Having depression Having polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Having acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition in which your skin becomes dark and thick, especially around your neck or armpits Smoking How can I prevent or delay getting type 2 diabetes? If you are at risk for diabetes, you may be able to prevent or delay getting it. Most of the things that you need to do involve having a healthier lifestyle. So if you make these changes, you will get other health benefits as well. You may lower your risk of other diseases, and you will probably feel better and have more energy. The changes are: Losing weight and keeping it off. Weight control is an important part of diabetes prevention. You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 10% of your current weight. For example, if you weigh 200 pounds, your goal would be to lose between 10 to 20 pounds. And once you lose the weight, it is important that you don't gain it back. Following a healthy eating plan. It is important to reduce the amount of calories you eat and drink each day, so you can lose weight and keep it off. To do that, your diet should include smaller portions and less fat and sugar. You should also eat a variety of foods from each food group, including plenty of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. It's also a good idea to limit red meat, and avoid processed meats. Get regular exercise. Exercise has many health benefits , including helping you to lose weight and lower your blood sugar levels. These both lower your risk of type 2 diabetes. Try to get at least 30 minutes of physical activity 5 days a week. If you have not been active, talk with your health care professional to figure out which types of exercise are best for you. You can start slowly and work up to your goal. Don't smoke. Smoking can contribute to insulin resistance, which can lead to type 2 diabetes. If you already smoke, try to quit . Talk to your health care provider to see whether there is anything else you can do to delay or to prevent type 2 diabetes. If you are at high risk, your provider may suggest that you take one of a few types of diabetes medicines . NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Heart disease is the leading cause of the death in the United States. It is also a major cause of disability. But you can take steps to improve your health and help prevent heart disease. The first step is understanding your risk of heart disease. Your risk depends on many factors, some of which are changeable and others that are not. Learning about them and working on the things that you can change can lower your risk of heart disease. What are the heart disease risk factors that I cannot change? There are some risk factors for heart disease that you cannot change: Your age. Your risk of heart disease increases as you get older. The risk is higher in: Men age 45 and older Women age 55 and older Your sex. Some risk factors may affect heart disease risk differently in women than in men. For example: The hormone estrogen provides women some protection against heart disease Diabetes raises the risk of heart disease more in women than in men. Your race or ethnicity. Certain groups have higher risks than others. For example: African Americans are more likely than Whites to die of heart disease, while Hispanic Americans are less likely to die of it Asian Americans as a group have lower rates of heart disease than other groups, but South Asian Americans have higher rates Your family history. You have a greater risk if you have a close family member who had heart disease at an early age, for example if: Your father or brother was diagnosed before age 55 Your mother or sister was diagnosed before age 65 What are the heart disease risk factors I can change and what can I do to lower my risk? There are many heart disease risk factors that you can change.  If you make these changes, you don't just help protect your heart. You can also improve your overall health and well-being. You may have a lot of changes to make. If you need to, you can make the changes gradually, one at a time. What's most important is that you make them. Depending on your lifestyle, these changes could include: Controlling your blood pressure. High blood pressure is a major risk factor for heart disease. It is important to get your blood pressure checked regularly - at least once a year for most adults, and more often if you have high blood pressure. You can also take steps, including lifestyle changes, to prevent or control high blood pressure. Keeping your cholesterol and triglyceride levels under control: High levels of cholesterol can clog your arteries and raise your risk of coronary artery disease and heart attack . Lifestyle changes and medicines (if needed) can lower your cholesterol. Triglycerides are another type of fat in the blood. High  levels of triglyceride may also raise the risk of coronary artery disease, especially in women. Staying at a healthy weight. Being overweight or having obesity can increase your risk of heart disease. This is mostly because they are linked to other heart disease risk factors, including high blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels, high blood pressure, and diabetes. Controlling your weight can lower these risks. Eating a healthy diet. Try to limit saturated fats , foods high in sodium (salt), and added sugars . Instead, eat plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and whole grains. The DASH diet is an example of an eating plan that can help you to lower your blood pressure and cholesterol, two things that can lower your risk of heart disease. Getting regular physical activity. Regular physical activity has many benefits, including strengthening your heart and improving your circulation. It can also help you maintain a healthy weight and lower cholesterol and blood pressure. All of these can lower your risk of heart disease. Limiting alcohol . Drinking too much alcohol can raise your blood pressure. It also adds extra calories, which may cause weight gain. Both of those raise your risk of heart disease. It's best not to drink, but if you do: Have no more than 2 drinks per day if you are a man. Have no more than 1 drink per day if you are a woman. Not smoking . Cigarette smoking raises your blood pressure and puts you at higher risk of heart attack and stroke . If you do not smoke, don't start. If you do smoke, quitting will lower your risk of heart disease. You can talk with your health care provider for help in finding the best way for you to quit. Managing stress. Stress is linked to heart disease in many ways. It can raise your blood pressure. Extreme stress can be a "trigger" for a heart attack. Also, some common ways of coping with stress, such as overeating, heavy drinking, and smoking, are bad for your heart. Some ways to help manage your stress include exercise, listening to music, focusing on something calm or peaceful, and meditating. Managing diabetes. Having diabetes doubles your risk of diabetic heart disease . That is because over time, high blood glucose (blood sugar) from diabetes can damage your blood vessels and the nerves that control your heart and blood vessels. So, it is important to get tested for diabetes , and if you have it, to keep it under control. Getting enough sleep. If you don't get enough sleep, you raise your risk of high blood pressure, obesity, and diabetes. Those three things can raise your risk of heart disease. To improve your sleep: If you are an adult, try to get 7 to 9 hours of sleep per night. Make sure that you have good sleep habits , such as keeping a regular sleep schedule and creating a good sleeping environment in your bedroom. If you have frequent sleep problems , contact your health care provider. One problem, sleep apnea , causes people to briefly stop breathing many times during sleep. This interferes with your ability to get a good rest and can raise your risk of heart disease. If you think you might have sleep apnea, ask your provider about having a sleep study . And if you do have sleep apnea, make sure that you get treatment for it.

What is mental health? Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being.  It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress , relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, from childhood and adolescence through adulthood and aging . What are mental disorders? Mental disorders are serious conditions that can affect your thinking, mood, and behavior. They may be occasional or long-lasting. They can affect your ability to relate to others and function each day. Mental disorders are common; many Americans will be diagnosed with one at some time in their life. But there are treatments. People with mental disorders can get better, and many of them recover completely. Why is mental health important? Mental health is important because it can help you to: Cope with the stresses of life Be physically healthy Have good relationships Make meaningful contributions to your community Work productively Realize your full potential Your mental health is also important because it can affect your physical health. For example, mental disorders can raise your risk for physical health problems such as stroke , type 2 diabetes , and heart disease . What can affect my mental health? There are many different factors that can affect your mental health, including: Biological factors, such as genes or brain chemistry Life experiences, such as trauma or abuse Family history of mental health problems Your lifestyle, such as diet, physical activity, and substance use You can also affect your mental health by taking steps to improve it , such as doing meditation, using relaxation techniques, and practicing gratitude. Can my mental health change over time? Over time, your mental health can change. For example, you may be dealing with a difficult situation, such as trying to manage a chronic illness, taking care of an ill relative, or facing money problems. The situation may wear you out and overwhelm your ability to cope with it. This can worsen your mental health. On the other hand, getting therapy may improve your mental health. What are the signs that I might have a mental health problem? When it comes to your emotions, it can be hard to know what is normal and what is not. There are warning signs that you may have a mental health problem, including: A change in your eating or sleeping habits Withdrawing from the people and activities you enjoy Having low or no energy Feeling numb or like nothing matters Having unexplained aches and pains Feeling helpless or hopeless Smoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usual Feeling unusually confused, forgetful, angry, upset, worried, or scared Having severe mood swings that cause problems in your relationships Having thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your head Hearing voices or believing things that are not true Thinking of harming yourself or others Not being able to perform daily tasks like taking care of your kids or getting to work or school What should I do if I think I have a mental health problem? If you think that you may have a mental health problem, get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders. If you don't know where to start, contact your primary care provider.

Mobility aids help you walk or move from place to place if you have a disability or an injury. They include: Crutches Canes Walkers Wheelchairs Motorized scooters You may need a walker or cane if you are at risk of falling. If you need to keep your body weight off your foot, ankle or knee, you may need crutches. You may need a wheelchair or a scooter if an injury or disease has left you unable to walk. Choosing these devices takes time and research. You should be fitted for crutches, canes and walkers. If they fit, these devices give you support, but if they don't fit, they can be uncomfortable and unsafe.

Good nutrition is important in keeping people healthy throughout their lives - when they are babies , toddlers , children , adults, and then older adults . It can help people live longer and lower their risk of health problems like heart disease , type 2 diabetes , obesity , and more. Good nutrition is about healthy eating. This means regularly choosing healthy foods and beverages. A healthy eating plan should give your body the energy and nutrients that you need every day. Nutrients include proteins , carbohydrates , fats , vitamins , minerals , and water . The plan should also take into account your preferences, cultural traditions, and budget. Healthy eating does not mean that you have to follow a very strict diet or eat only a few specific types of food. It doesn't mean that you can never eat your favorite foods. You can eat a variety of foods, including less healthy favorites. But it's important not to eat too much of those foods or have them too often. You can balance those foods with healthier foods and regular physical activity . The keys to a healthy eating plan include: Eating a variety of foods, including vegetables, fruits, and whole-grain products Eating lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, and low-fat dairy products Getting enough fiber Drinking lots of water Limiting salt , added sugars, alcohol , and saturated fat Making sure that you get enough nutrients, especially calcium , vitamin D , and potassium Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Occupational health problems occur at work or because of the kind of work you do. These problems can include: Cuts, fractures (broken bones), and sprains and strains Loss of limbs Repetitive motion disorders Hearing problems caused by exposure to noise Vision problems Illness caused by breathing, touching, or swallowing unsafe substances Illness caused by exposure to radiation Exposure to germs in health care settings Good job safety and prevention practices can reduce your risk of these problems. Try to stay fit, reduce stress, set up your work area properly, and use the right equipment and gear.

Pets can add fun, companionship and a feeling of safety to your life. Before getting a pet, think carefully about which animal is best for your family. What is each family member looking for in a pet? Who will take care of it? Does anyone have pet allergies? What type of animal suits your lifestyle and budget? Once you own a pet, keep it healthy. Know the signs of medical problems. Take your pet to the veterinarian if you notice: Loss of appetite Drinking a lot of water Gaining or losing a lot of weight quickly Strange behavior Being sluggish and tired Trouble getting up or down Strange lumps

Sexuality is a big part of being human. Love, affection and sexual intimacy all play a role in healthy relationships. They also contribute to your sense of well-being. A number of disorders can affect the ability to have or enjoy sex  in both men and women . Factors that can affect sexual health include: Fear of unplanned pregnancy Concerns about infertility Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Chronic diseases such as cancer or heart disease Medicines that affect sexual desire or performance

Sports can be a great way to get in shape or stay that way. Having a specific goal can be a great motivator.  Physically, you need strength and endurance. Your training will vary with your sport. You would not train the same way for pole vaulting as for swimming. You might, however, cross train. Cross training simply means that you include a variety of fitness activities in your program. Research shows that cross training builds stronger bones. Remember to listen to your body. If you frequently feel exhausted or you are in pain, you may be overdoing it. Injuries can be the result. And be sure that you use your body and your equipment safely .  What you eat and drink is also important. Water is the most important nutrient for active people. Drink it before, during and after workouts.

Exercising is good for you, but sometimes you can injure yourself when you play sports or exercise. Accidents, poor training practices, or improper gear can cause them. Some people get hurt because they are not in shape. Not warming up or stretching enough can also lead to injuries. The most common sports injuries are: Sprains and strains Knee injuries Swollen muscles Achilles tendon injuries Pain along the shin bone Rotator cuff injuries Fractures (broken bones) Dislocations If you get hurt, stop playing. Continuing to play or exercise can cause more harm.  Treatment often begins with the RICE (Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation) method to relieve pain, reduce swelling, and speed healing. Other possible treatments include pain relievers, keeping the injured area from moving, rehabilitation, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Traveling can increase your chances of getting sick. A long flight can increase your risk for deep vein thrombosis. Once you arrive, it takes time to adjust to the water, food, and air in another place. Water in developing countries can contain viruses , bacteria , and parasites that cause stomach upset and diarrhea. Be safe by using only bottled or purified water for drinking, making ice cubes, and brushing your teeth. If you use tap water, boil it or use iodine tablets. Food poisoning can also be a risk. Eat only food that is fully cooked and served hot.  Avoid unwashed or unpeeled raw fruits and vegetables. If you are traveling out of the country, you might also need vaccinations or medicines to prevent specific illnesses. Which ones you need will depend on what part of the world you're visiting, the time of year, your age, overall health status, and previous vaccinations. See your doctor 4 to 6 weeks before your trip. Most vaccines take time to become effective. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Your vital signs show how well your body is functioning. They are usually measured at doctor's offices, often as part of a health checkup , or during an emergency room visit. They include: Blood pressure, which measures the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Blood pressure that is too high or too low can cause problems. Your blood pressure has two numbers. The first number is the pressure when your heart beats and is pumping the blood.  The second is from when your heart is at rest, between beats. A normal blood pressure reading for adults is lower than 120/80 and higher than 90/60. Heart rate, or pulse, which measures how fast your heart is beating. A problem with your heart rate may be an arrhythmia . Your normal heart rate depends on factors such as your age, how much you exercise, whether you are sitting or standing, which medicines you take, and your weight. Respiratory rate, which measures your breathing. Mild breathing changes can be from causes such as a stuffy nose or hard exercise. But slow or fast breathing can also be a sign of a serious breathing problem . Temperature, which measures how hot your body is. A body temperature that is higher than normal (over 98.6 F, or 37 C) is called a fever .

Regular checkups with your health care provider are different from appointments for sickness or injury. Your checkups, which are also called well-woman exams, include physical exams as well as preventive care. They can help find health problems early, when they may be easier to treat. Your checkup will include screenings for chronic diseases. As a woman, you may also get special exams and screenings, such as: A pelvic exam to check the health of your reproductive organs. The provider will look at your vulva, vagina, and cervix. They will also do an internal exam to feel the size and shape of your internal organs such as the uterus and ovaries. A cervical cancer screening , which uses a Pap test , an HPV test , or both. The tests can help prevent cervical cancer . A Pap test checks for cervical cancer and for abnormal cells that could turn into cancer. An HPV test looks for the types of HPV which can cause cervical cancer. For both tests, your provider will take a sample of cells from the surface of your cervix and send them to a lab to be examined under a microscope. A clinical breast exam to check for breast cancer . The provider will feel and look at your breasts and armpit area for lumps or other changes. Which tests you get and how often you need them will depend on your age, overall health, and family health history . In some cases, your provider may also recommend other tests as well. For example, if you have a family history of certain cancers, your provider may recommend genetic testing . During your checkup, you and your provider may also talk about other issues, such as: Birth control or family planning Menopause Menstrual concerns Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Vaccines Your overall health, including suggestions on how to have a healthy lifestyle To make the most of your next checkup, bring a list of any questions or concerns you have, so you can talk about them with your provider.

